Volume 2
Principles of Accounting,
Volume 2: Managerial
Accounting

SENIOR CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS
MITCHELL FRANKLIN, LE MOYNE COLLEGE (FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING)
PATTY GRAYBEAL, UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN-DEARBORN (MANAGERIAL ACCOUNTING)
DIXON COOPER, OUACHITA BAPTIST UNIVERSITY
OpenStax
Rice University
6100 Main Street MS-375
Houston, Texas 77005

To learn more about OpenStax, visit https://openstax.org.
Individual print copies and bulk orders can be purchased through our website.

©2019 Rice University. Textbook content produced by OpenStax is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution Non-Commercial ShareAlike 4.0 International License (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0). Under this license, any
user of this textbook or the textbook contents herein can share, remix, and build upon the content for
noncommercial purposes only. Any adaptations must be shared under the same type of license. In any case of
sharing the original or adapted material, whether in whole or in part, the user must provide proper attribution
as follows:

- If you noncommercially redistribute this textbook in a digital format (including but not limited to PDF and
    HTML), then you must retain on every page the following attribution:
    "Download for free at https://openstax.org/details/books/principles-managerial-accounting."

- If you noncommercially redistribute this textbook in a print format, then you must include on every
    physical page the following attribution:
    "Download for free at https://openstax.org/details/books/principles-managerial-accounting."

- If you noncommercially redistribute part of this textbook, then you must retain in every digital format
    page view (including but not limited to PDF and HTML) and on every physical printed page the following
    attribution:
    "Download for free at https://openstax.org/details/books/principles-managerial-accounting."

- If you use this textbook as a bibliographic reference, please include
    https://openstax.org/details/books/principles-managerial-accounting in your citation.

For questions regarding this licensing, please contact support@openstax.org.

Trademarks
The OpenStax name, OpenStax logo, OpenStax book covers, OpenStax CNX name, OpenStax CNX logo,
OpenStax Tutor name, Openstax Tutor logo, Connexions name, Connexions logo, Rice University name, and
Rice University logo are not subject to the license and may not be reproduced without the prior and express
written consent of Rice University.

PRINT BOOK ISBN-10       1-947172-60-3
PRINT BOOK ISBN-13       978-1-947172-60-9
PDF VERSION ISBN-10      1-947172-59-X
PDF VERSION ISBN-13      978-1-947172-59-3
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
OPENSTAX

OpenStax provides free, peer-reviewed, openly licensed textbooks for introductory college and Advanced
Placement® courses and low-cost, personalized courseware that helps students learn. A nonprofit ed tech
initiative based at Rice University, we're committed to helping students access the tools they need to complete
their courses and meet their educational goals.

RICE UNIVERSITY

OpenStax, OpenStax CNX, and OpenStax Tutor are initiatives of Rice University. As a leading research university
with a distinctive commitment to undergraduate education, Rice University aspires to path-breaking research,
unsurpassed teaching, and contributions to the betterment of our world. It seeks to fulfill this mission by
cultivating a diverse community of learning and discovery that produces leaders across the spectrum of human
endeavor.

PHILANTHROPIC SUPPORT

OpenStax is grateful for our generous philanthropic partners, who support our vision to improve educational
opportunities for all learners.

Laura and John Arnold Foundation                 The Maxfield Foundation
Arthur and Carlyse Ciocca Charitable Foundation  Burt and Deedee McMurtry
Ann and John Doerr                               Michelson 20MM Foundation
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation                  National Science Foundation
Girard Foundation                                The Open Society Foundations
Google Inc.                                      Jumee Yhu and David E. Park III
The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation         Brian D. Patterson USA-International Foundation
Rusty and John Jaggers                           The Bill and Stephanie Sick Fund
The Calvin K. Kazanjian Economics Foundation     Robin and Sandy Stuart Foundation
Charles Koch Foundation                          The Stuart Family Foundation
Leon Lowenstein Foundation, Inc.                 Tammy and Guillermo Treviño
  Study where you want, what
   you want, when you want.

                    When you access College Success in our web view, you can use our new online
                         highlighting and note-taking features to create your own study guides.
                                               Our books are free and flexible, forever.

                   Get started at openstax.org/details/books/principles-managerial-accounting

Access. The future of education.
openstax.org
    TABLE OF CONTENTS

    Preface 1

1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers 11

        1.1 Define Managerial Accounting and Identify the Three Primary Responsibilities of
              Management 12

        1.2 Distinguish between Financial and Managerial Accounting 21
        1.3 Explain the Primary Roles and Skills Required of Managerial Accountants 28
        1.4 Describe the Role of the Institute of Management Accountants and the Use of Ethical

              Standards 38
        1.5 Describe Trends in Today's Business Environment and Analyze Their Impact on

              Accounting 43

2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting 69

        2.1 Distinguish between Merchandising, Manufacturing, and Service Organizations 70
        2.2 Identify and Apply Basic Cost Behavior Patterns 83
        2.3 Estimate a Variable and Fixed Cost Equation and Predict Future Costs 100

3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis 127

        3.1 Explain Contribution Margin and Calculate Contribution Margin per Unit, Contribution
              Margin Ratio, and Total Contribution Margin 128

        3.2 Calculate a Break-Even Point in Units and Dollars 135
        3.3 Perform Break-Even Sensitivity Analysis for a Single Product Under Changing Business

              Situations 147
        3.4 Perform Break-Even Sensitivity Analysis for a Multi-Product Environment Under Changing

              Business Situations 154
        3.5 Calculate and Interpret a Company's Margin of Safety and Operating Leverage 158

4 Job Order Costing 185

        4.1 Distinguish between Job Order Costing and Process Costing 186
        4.2 Describe and Identify the Three Major Components of Product Costs under Job Order

              Costing 194
        4.3 Use the Job Order Costing Method to Trace the Flow of Product Costs through the

              Inventory Accounts 207
        4.4 Compute a Predetermined Overhead Rate and Apply Overhead to Production 213
        4.5 Compute the Cost of a Job Using Job Order Costing 217
        4.6 Determine and Dispose of Underapplied or Overapplied Overhead 220
        4.7 Prepare Journal Entries for a Job Order Cost System 223
        4.8 Explain How a Job Order Cost System Applies to a Nonmanufacturing Environment 226

5 Process Costing 251
             5.1 Compare and Contrast Job Order Costing and Process Costing 252
             5.2 Explain and Identify Conversion Costs 262
             5.3 Explain and Compute Equivalent Units and Total Cost of Production in an Initial Processing

                   Stage 264
             5.4 Explain and Compute Equivalent Units and Total Cost of Production in a Subsequent

                   Processing Stage 268
             5.5 Prepare Journal Entries for a Process Costing System 271

   6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing 293

             6.1 Calculate Predetermined Overhead and Total Cost under the Traditional Allocation
                   Method 294

             6.2 Describe and Identify Cost Drivers 299
             6.3 Calculate Activity-Based Product Costs 302
             6.4 Compare and Contrast Traditional and Activity-Based Costing Systems 310
             6.5 Compare and Contrast Variable and Absorption Costing 313

   7 Budgeting 347

             7.1 Describe How and Why Managers Use Budgets 348
             7.2 Prepare Operating Budgets 357
             7.3 Prepare Financial Budgets 365
             7.4 Prepare Flexible Budgets 374
             7.5 Explain How Budgets Are Used to Evaluate Goals 378

   8 Standard Costs and Variances 405

             8.1 Explain How and Why a Standard Cost Is Developed 406
             8.2 Compute and Evaluate Materials Variances 411
             8.3 Compute and Evaluate Labor Variances 416
             8.4 Compute and Evaluate Overhead Variances 421
             8.5 Describe How Companies Use Variance Analysis 429

   9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization 457

             9.1 Differentiate between Centralized and Decentralized Management 458
             9.2 Describe How Decision-Making Differs between Centralized and Decentralized

                   Environments 464
             9.3 Describe the Types of Responsibility Centers 467
             9.4 Describe the Effects of Various Decisions on Performance Evaluation of Responsibility

                   Centers 481

   10 Short-Term Decision Making 513

             10.1 Identify Relevant Information for Decision-Making 514

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
         10.2 Evaluate and Determine Whether to Accept or Reject a Special Order 521
         10.3 Evaluate and Determine Whether to Make or Buy a Component 524
         10.4 Evaluate and Determine Whether to Keep or Discontinue a Segment or Product 528
         10.5 Evaluate and Determine Whether to Sell or Process Further 532
         10.6 Evaluate and Determine How to Make Decisions When Resources Are Constrained 536

11 Capital Budgeting Decisions 565

         11.1 Describe Capital Investment Decisions and How They Are Applied 566
         11.2 Evaluate the Payback and Accounting Rate of Return in Capital Investment

               Decisions 570
         11.3 Explain the Time Value of Money and Calculate Present and Future Values of Lump Sums

               and Annuities 577
         11.4 Use Discounted Cash Flow Models to Make Capital Investment Decisions 585
         11.5 Compare and Contrast Non-Time Value-Based Methods and Time Value-Based Methods in

               Capital Investment Decisions 594

12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures 619

         12.1 Explain the Importance of Performance Measurement 620
         12.2 Identify the Characteristics of an Effective Performance Measure 626
         12.3 Evaluate an Operating Segment or a Project Using Return on Investment, Residual

               Income, and Economic Value Added 629
         12.4 Describe the Balanced Scorecard and Explain How It Is Used 638

13 Sustainability Reporting 663

         13.1 Describe Sustainability and the Way It Creates Business Value 664
         13.2 Identify User Needs for Information 681
         13.3 Discuss Examples of Major Sustainability Initiatives 686
         13.4 Future Issues in Sustainability 691

A Financial Statement Analysis 701

B Time Value of Money 713

C Suggested Resources 717

     Index 733
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Preface  1

Preface

Welcome to Principles of Accounting, an OpenStax resource. This textbook was written to increase student
access to high-quality learning materials, maintaining highest standards of academic rigor at little to no cost.

About OpenStax

OpenStax is a nonprofit based at Rice University, and it's our mission to improve student access to education.
Our first openly licensed college textbook was published in 2012, and our library has since scaled to over 30
books for college and AP® courses used by hundreds of thousands of students. OpenStax Tutor, our low-cost
personalized learning tool, is being used in college courses throughout the country. Through our partnerships
with philanthropic foundations and our alliance with other educational resource organizations, OpenStax is
breaking down the most common barriers to learning and empowering students and instructors to succeed.

About OpenStax resources

Customization

Principles of Accounting is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
International (CC BY-NC-SA) license, which means that you can distribute, remix, and build upon the content,
as long as you provide attribution to OpenStax and its content contributors, do not use the content for
commercial purposes, and distribute the content under the same CC BY-NC-SA license.

Because our books are openly licensed, you are free to use the entire book or pick and choose the sections
that are most relevant to the needs of your course. Feel free to remix the content by assigning your students
certain chapters and sections in your syllabus, in the order that you prefer. You can even provide a direct link
in your syllabus to the sections in the web view of your book.

Instructors also have the option of creating a customized version of their OpenStax book. The custom version
can be made available to students in low-cost print or digital form through their campus bookstore. Visit the
Instructor Resources section of your book page on openstax.org for more information.

Art attribution in Principles of Accounting

In Principles of Accounting, most art contains attribution to its title, creator or rights holder, host platform, and
license within the caption. Because the art is openly licensed, anyone may reuse the art as long as they provide
the same attribution to its original source.

To maximize readability and content flow, some art does not include attribution in the text. If you reuse art
from this text that does not have attribution provided, use the following attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license.

Errata

All OpenStax textbooks undergo a rigorous review process. However, like any professional-grade textbook,
errors sometimes occur. Since our books are web based, we can make updates periodically when deemed
pedagogically necessary. If you have a correction to suggest, submit it through the link on your book page on
openstax.org. Subject matter experts review all errata suggestions. OpenStax is committed to remaining
transparent about all updates, so you will also find a list of past errata changes on your book page on
openstax.org.
2                                                                                 Preface

Format

You can access this textbook for free in web view or PDF through openstax.org, and for a low cost in print.

About Principles of Accounting

Principles of Accounting is designed to meet the scope and sequence requirements of a two-semester
accounting course that covers the fundamentals of financial and managerial accounting. This book is
specifically designed to appeal to both accounting and non-accounting majors, exposing students to the core
concepts of accounting in familiar ways to build a strong foundation that can be applied across business fields.
Each chapter opens with a relatable real-life scenario for today's college student. Thoughtfully designed
examples are presented throughout each chapter, allowing students to build on emerging accounting
knowledge. Concepts are further reinforced through applicable connections to more detailed business
processes. Students are immersed in the "why" as well as the "how" aspects of accounting in order to
reinforce concepts and promote comprehension over rote memorization.

Coverage and scope

Our Principles of Accounting textbook adheres to the scope and sequence requirements of accounting courses
nationwide. We have endeavored to make the core concepts and practical applications of accounting
engaging, relevant, and accessible to students.
Principles of Accounting, Volume 1: Financial Accounting
Chapter 1: The Role of Accounting in Society
Chapter 2: Introduction to Financial Statements
Chapter 3: Analyzing and Recording Transactions
Chapter 4: The Adjustment Process
Chapter 5: Completing the Accounting Cycle
Chapter 6: Merchandising Transactions
Chapter 7: Accounting Information Systems
Chapter 8: Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash
Chapter 9: Accounting for Receivables
Chapter 10: Inventory
Chapter 11: Long-Term Assets
Chapter 12: Current Liabilities
Chapter 13: Long-Term Liabilities
Chapter 14: Corporation Accounting
Chapter 15: Partnership Accounting
Chapter 16: Statement of Cash Flows
Principles of Accounting, Volume 2: Managerial Accounting
Chapter 1: Accounting as a Tool for Managers
Chapter 2: Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Preface  3

Chapter 3: Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

Chapter 4: Job Order Costing

Chapter 5: Process Costing

Chapter 6: Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing

Chapter 7: Budgeting

Chapter 8: Standard Costs and Variances

Chapter 9: Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization

Chapter 10: Short-Term Decision-Making

Chapter 11: Capital Budgeting Decisions

Chapter 12: Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures

Chapter 13: Sustainability Reporting

Engaging feature boxes

Throughout Principles of Accounting, you will find features that engage students by taking selected topics a step
further.

  · Your Turn. This feature provides students an opportunity to apply covered concepts.
  · Concepts in Practice. This feature takes students beyond mechanics and illustrates the utility of a given

      concept for accountants and non-accountants. We encourage instructors to reference these as part of
      their in-class lectures and assessments to provide easily relatable applications.
  · Think It Through. This scenario-based feature puts students in the role of decision-maker. With topics
      ranging from ethical dilemmas to conflicting analytical results, the purpose of this feature is to teach
      students that in the real world not every question has just one answer.
  · Continuing Application at Work. This feature follows an individual company or segment of an industry
      and examines how businesspeople conduct the decision-making process in different situations. It allows
      students to see how concepts build on each other.
  · Ethical Considerations. This feature illustrates the ethical implication of decisions, how accounting
      concepts are applied to real-life examples, and how financial and managerial decisions can impact many
      stakeholders.
  · IFRS Connection. This feature presents the differences and similarities between U.S. GAAP and IFRS,
      helping students understand how accounting concepts and rules between countries may vary and thus
      affect financial reporting and decision-making.
  · Link to Learning. This feature provides a very brief introduction to online resources and videos that are
      pertinent to students' exploration of the topic at hand.

Pedagogical features that reinforce key concepts

  · Learning Objectives. Each chapter is organized into sections based on clear and comprehensive learning
      objectives that help guide students on what they can expect to learn. After completing the modules and
      assessments, students should be able to demonstrate mastery of the learning objectives.

  · Summaries. Designed to support both students and instructors, section summaries distill the information
      in each module down to key, concise points.

  · Key Terms. Key terms are bolded the first time that they are used and are followed by a definition in
      context. Definitions of key terms are also listed in the glossary, which appears at the end of the chapter.
4                                                                                 Preface

Assessments to test comprehension and practice skills

An assortment of assessment types are provided in this text to allow for practice and self-assessment
throughout the course of study.

  · Multiple Choice. are basic review questions that test comprehension.
  · Questions include brief, open-response questions to test comprehension.
  · Exercises (Sets A and B) are application Application questions that require a combination of quantitative

      and analytical skills.
  · Problems (Sets A and B) are advanced Advanced activities that allow students to demonstrate learning

      and application of multiple learning objectives and skills concurrently in one set of facts. Problems are
      designed to assess higher levels of Bloom's taxonomy.
  · Thought Provokers are open-ended questions, often with more than one acceptable response, designed
      to stretch students intellectually.

Effective art program

Our art program is designed to enhance students' understanding of concepts through clear and effective
presentations of financial materials and diagrams.

Figure 1 Journal Entry.

Figure 2 Work in Process Inventory T-Account.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Preface                         5

Figure 3 Income Statement.

Figure 4 Organizational Chart.
6  Preface

Figure 5 Cash Interest Payment.

Figure 6 General Ledger.

Additional resources

Student and instructor resources

We've compiled additional resources for both students and instructors, including Getting Started Guides, an
instructor solution guide, and companion presentation slides. Instructor resources require a verified instructor
account, which you can apply for when you log in or create your account on openstax.org. Instructor and
student resources are typically available within a few months after the book's initial publication. Take
advantage of these resources to supplement your OpenStax book.

Community Hubs

OpenStax partners with the Institute for the Study of Knowledge Management in Education (ISKME) to offer
Community Hubs on OER Commons--a platform for instructors to share community-created resources that
support OpenStax books, free of charge. Through our Community Hubs, instructors can upload their own
materials or download resources to use in their own courses, including additional ancillaries, teaching
material, multimedia, and relevant course content. We encourage instructors to join the hubs for the subjects

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Preface  7

most relevant to your teaching and research as an opportunity both to enrich your courses and to engage with
other faculty.

To reach the Community Hubs, visit www.oercommons.org/hubs/OpenStax.

Technology partners

As allies in making high-quality learning materials accessible, our technology partners offer optional low-cost
tools that are integrated with OpenStax books. To access the technology options for your text, visit your book
page on openstax.org.

About the authors

Senior contributing authors

Mitchell Franklin, Le Moyne College (Financial Accounting)

Mitchell Franklin (PhD, CPA) is an Associate Professor and Director of the Undergraduate and Graduate
Accounting Programs at Le Moyne College's Madden School of Business. His research interests include the
impact of tax law on policy, and innovative education in both financial accounting and taxation, with articles
published in journals including Issues in Accounting Education, Advances in Accounting Education, Tax Notes,
Journal of Taxation, and The CPA Journal and Tax Adviser. He teaches introductory and advanced courses in
individual and corporate taxation as well as financial accounting. Prior to joining Le Moyne College, he served
on the faculty at Syracuse University.

Patty Graybeal, University of Michigan-Dearborn (Managerial Accounting)

Patty Graybeal received her BBA from Radford University and her MACCT and PhD from Virginia Tech. She
teaches undergraduate and graduate courses in financial, managerial, governmental, and international
accounting. She has published scholarly articles on performance plans and compensation structures, as well
as bankruptcy prediction, and she currently focuses on pedagogical issues related to instructional methods
and resources that enhance student academic success. Prior to UM-Dearborn, she was on the faculty at Wake
Forest University, George Mason University, and Virginia Tech. She brings significant real-world experience to
the classroom from her prior work in healthcare administration and her current work with the auto industry.

Dixon Cooper, Ouachita Baptist University

Dixon Cooper received his BBA in Accounting and MS in Taxation from the University of North Texas. He has
taught undergraduate and graduate courses in accounting, finance, and economics. In addition to his
academic activities, he served for approximately fifteen years as an author/editor for the AICPA's continuing
education program and maintained a tax compliance and financial services practice. He also has several years
of experience in public accounting and consulting. Prior to teaching at Ouachita Baptist University, he was a
faculty member at the University of North Texas, Texas Christian University Austin College, and the University
of Arkansas.

Contributing authors

LuAnn Bean, Florida Institute of Technology

Ian Burt, Niagara University

Shana Carr, San Diego City College

David T. Collins, Bellarmine University

Shawna Coram, Florida State College at Jacksonville
8                                                                                 Preface

Kenneth Creech, Briar Cliff University
Alan Czyzewski, Indiana State University
Michael Gauci, Florida Atlantic University
Cindy Greenman, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
Michael Haselkorn, Bentley University
Christine Irujo, Westfield State University
Cynthia Johnson, University of Arkansas at Little Rock
Cynthia Khanlarian, North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University
Terri Lukshaitis, Ferris State University
Debra Luna, Southwest University
Bill Nantz, Houston Community College
Tatyana Pashnyak, Bainbridge State College
Brian Pusateri, University of Scranton
Ellen Rackas, Muhlenberg College
Marianne Rexer, Wilkes University
Roslyn Roberts, California State University, Sacramento
Rebecca Rosner, Long Island University
Jeffrey J. Sabolish, University of Michigan-Flint
Jason E. Swartzlander, Bluffton University
Diane Tanner, University of North Florida
Mark M. Ulrich, Queensborough Community College
Janis Weber, University of Louisiana Monroe
Linda Williams, Tidewater Community College
Darryl Woolley, University of Idaho
Reviewers
Janice Akao, Butler Community College
Chandra D. Arthur, Cuyahoga Community College
Kwadwo Asare, Bryant University
Dereck Barr-Pulliam, University of Wisconsin-Madison
John Bedient, Albion College
Debra Benson, Kennesaw State University
Amy Bourne, Oregon State University
Stacy Boyer-Davis, Northern Michigan University
Dena Breece, Methodist University
Lawrence Chui, University of St. Thomas, Minnesota
Sandra Cohen, Columbia College Chicago

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Preface                                                        9

Bryan Coleman, Assumption College
Sue Cooper, Salisbury University
Constance Crawford, Ramapo College of New Jersey
Cori O. Crews, Valdosta State University
Annette Davis, Glendale Community College
Ronald de Ramon, Rockland Community College
Julie Dilling, Moraine Park Technical College
Terry Elliott, Morehead State University
Jim Emig, Villanova University
Darius Fatemi, Northern Kentucky University
Rhonda Gilreath, Tiffin University
Alan Glazer, Franklin & Marshall College
Marina Grau, Houston Community College
Amber Gray, Adrian College
Jeffry Haber, Iona College
Michelle Hagadorn, Roanoke College
Regina Ivory Butts, Fort Valley State University
Simone Keize, Broward College
Christine Kloezeman, California State University, Los Angeles
Lauri L. Kremer, Lycoming College
W. Eric Lee, University of Northern Iowa
Julie G. Lindsey, University of Phoenix
Jennifer Mack, Lindenwood University
Suneel Maheshwari, Indiana University of Pennsylvania
Richard Mandau, Piedmont Technical College
Josephine Mathias, Mercer County Community College
Ermira Mazziotta, Muhlenberg College
Karen B. McCarron, Georgia Gwinnett College
Michelle A. McFeaters, Grove City College
Britton McKay, Georgia Southern University
Christopher McNamara, Finger Lakes Community College
Glenn McQueary, Houston Community College
Tammy Metzke, Milwaukee Area Technical College
Stacey Mirinaviciene, Keuka College
Eleonor Moore, Kirtland Community College
Hassan Niazi, Northern State University
10                                                                                Preface

Felicia Olagbemi, Colorado State University-Global Campus
Suzanne Owens, Colorado Mesa University
Jenice Prather-Kinsey, University of Alabama at Birmingham
Tom Prieto, College of the Canyons
Atul Rai, Wichita State University
Kevin Raiford, College of Southern Nevada
Dave Repp, Strayer University
Patrick Rogan, Cosumnes River College
John Rossi, Moravian College
Angela Seidel, Saint Francis University
Margaret Shackell, Cornell University
Debra Sinclair, University of South Florida St. Petersburg
Mohsen Souissi, Fayetteville State University
Zivia Sweeney, University of Southern California
Tim Swenson, Sullivan University
Hai Ta, Niagara University
Andress Walker, Ventura County Community College District
Teresa Walker, Greensboro College
Roland Warfield, Seton Hill University
Michael Wiggins, Georgia Southern University
Joseph Winter, Niagara University
David Ziebart, University of Kentucky

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
     1

              Accounting as a Tool for Managers

Figure 1.1 Business Honor Society Student Meeting. (credit: modification of "Group of People Sitting Near
Table" by Christina Morillo/Pexels, Pexels license / Public Domain)

 Chapter Outline

  1.1 Define Managerial Accounting and Identify the Three Primary Responsibilities of Management
  1.2 Distinguish between Financial and Managerial Accounting
  1.3 Explain the Primary Roles and Skills Required of Managerial Accountants
  1.4 Describe the Role of the Institute of Management Accountants and the Use of Ethical Standards
  1.5 Describe Trends in Today's Business Environment and Analyze Their Impact on Accounting

      Why It Matters

   You have been elected as the coordinator of committees for your school's business honor society. In essence,
   this makes you the manager of all the committees. This is a new position that was created because the
   committees have never been evaluated for their effectiveness within the organization. Your job in this position
   is to ensure that the committees--such as recruiting, fundraising, community service, professional activities,
   and regional and national conference presentations--are operating within the goals put forth in the society's
   mission statements, as well as to assess the effectiveness and efficiency of each committee in meeting the
   organization's goals. Your starting point is to understand the overriding mission--the strategic direction and
   purpose--of the society. Next, you want to understand how each committee fits into the strategic goal of the
   society and then identify the separate goals of each committee. Once you understand the purpose and goal of
   each committee, it will be necessary to know how each committee is going about meeting its goals. Last, you
   will evaluate each committee to see if the goals are being met.
   Notice that in performing your role as the coordinator of committees, you will need financial information, such
   as budgets and financial statements, along with other nonfinancial information, for example, the society's
12                                                                                Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers

mission statement, each committee's strategy statement, and records of their activities and meetings. To help
assess how well the honor society and its committees are meeting their goals, you need more information
than can be obtained from simply looking at the various financial documents assembled by each committee
within the organization. The same is true in any business organization. Managers and other internal decision
makers need more information than is available in the basic financial statements: they need information
generated by the managerial accounting system.

 1.1 Define Managerial Accounting and Identify the Three Primary
Responsibilities of Management

Financial accounting process provides a useful level of detail for external users, such as investors and
creditors, but it does not provide enough detailed information for the types of decisions made in the day-to-
day operation of the business or for the types of decisions that guide the company long term. Managerial
accounting is the process that allows decision makers to set and evaluate business goals by determining what
information they need to make a particular decision and how to analyze and communicate this information.
Let's explore the role of managerial accounting in several different organizations and at different levels of the
organization, and then examine the primary responsibilities of management.

Three friends who are recent graduates from business school, Alex, Hana, and Gillian, have each just begun
their first postgraduation jobs. They meet for lunch and discuss what each of their jobs entails. Alex has taken
a position as a market analyst for a Fortune 500 company that operates in the shipping industry. Her first
assignment is to suggest and evaluate ways the company can increase the revenue from shipping contracts by
10 percent for the year. Before tackling this project, she has a number of questions. What is the purpose of this
analysis? What type of information does she need? Where would she find this information? Can she get it from
a basic income statement and balance sheet? How will she know if her suggestions for pricing are creating
more shipping contracts and helping to meet the company's goal? She begins with an analysis of the
company's top fifty customers, including the prices they pay, discounts offered, discounts applied, frequency
of shipments, and so on, to determine if there are price adjustments that need to be made to attract those
customers to use the company's shipping services more frequently.

Hana has a position in the human resources department of a pharmaceutical company and is asked to
research and analyze a new trend in compensation in which employers are forgoing raises to employees and
are instead giving large bonuses for meeting certain goals. Her task is to ascertain if this new idea would be
appropriate for her company. Her questions are similar to Alex's. What information does she need? Where
would she find this information? How would she determine the impact of this type of change on the business?
If implemented, what information would she need to assess the success of the plan?

Gillian is working in the supply chain area of a major manufacturer that produces the various mirrors found on
cars and trucks. Her first assignment is to determine whether it is more cost effective and efficient for her
company to make or purchase a bracket used in the assembly of the mirrors. Her questions are also similar to
her friends' questions. Why is the company considering this decision? What information does she need?
Where would she find this information? Would choosing the option with the lowest cost be the correct choice?

The women are surprised by how similar their questions are despite how different their jobs are. They each
are assigned tasks that require them to use various forms of information from many different sources to
answer an important question for their respective companies. Table 1.1 provides possible answers to each of
the questions posed in these scenarios.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers                                                                              13

                             Managerial Accounting and Various Business Roles

           Questions                         Possible Answers

                                             Alex, Marketing Analyst

What is the purpose of this                  To determine a better way to price their services
analysis?

What type of information                     Financial and nonfinancial information, such as the number of contracts
does she need?                               per client

Where would she find this                    Financial statements, customer contracts, competitor information, and
information?                                 customer surveys

Can she get it from a basic                  No, she would need to use many other sources of information
income statement and
balance sheet?

How will she know if her                     By using a means to evaluate the success, such as by comparing the
suggestions for pricing are                  number of contracts received from each company before the new pricing
creating more shipping                       structure with the number received after the pricing change of contracts
contracts and helping to
meet the company's goal?

                                             Hana, Human Resources

What information does she                    Financial and nonfinancial information, such as how other companies
need?                                        have implemented this idea, including the amount of the bonus and the
                                             types of measures on which the bonus was measured

Where would she find this                    Mostly from internal company sources, such as employee performance
information?                                 records, but also from industry and competitor sources

How would she determine                      Perform surveys to determine the effect of the bonus method on
the impact of this type of                   employee morale and employee turnover; she could determine the effect
change on the business?                      on gross revenue of annual bonuses versus annual raises

If implemented, what                         Measuring employee turnover; evaluating employee satisfaction after the
information would she need                   change; assessing whether the performance measures being used to
to assess the success of the                 determine the bonus were measures that truly impacted the company in
plan?                                        a positive manner

                                             Gillian, Supply Chain

Why is the company                           Management likely wants to minimize costs, and this particular part is one
considering this decision?                   they believe may be more cost effective to buy than to make

Table 1.1
14                           Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers

                           Managerial Accounting and Various Business Roles

    Questions                Possible Answers

What information does she    She needs the cost to buy the part as well as all the costs that would be
need?                        incurred to make the part; whether her company has the ability (capacity)
                             to make the part; the quality of the part if they buy it compared to if they
                             make it; the ability of a supplier of the part to deliver on time

Where would she find this    She would find the information from internal records about production
information?                 costs, from cost details provided by the external producer, and from
                             industry reports on the quality of production from the external supplier

Would choosing the option    The lowest-cost option may not be the best choice if the quality is subpar,
with the lowest cost be the  if the part is not delivered in a timely manner and thus throws off or slows
correct choice?              production, or if the use of a purchased part will affect the relationship
                             between the company and the car manufacturer to whom the mirror is
                             ultimately sold

Table 1.1

The questions the women have and the answers they require show that there are many types of information
that a company needs to make business decisions. Although none of these individuals is given the title of
manager, they need information to help provide management with the information necessary to make
decisions to move the company forward with its strategic plan. The scenarios of the three women are not
unique. These types of questions occur every day in businesses across the world.

Some decisions will be more clearly appropriate for higher-level management. For example, Lynx Boating
Company produces three different lines of boats (sport boats, pontoon boats, and large cruisers). All three
boat lines are profitable, but the pontoon boat line seems to be less profitable than the other two types of
boats. Management may want to consider abandoning the pontoon line and using that additional capacity to
produce one of the other more profitable lines. They would need detailed financial information in order to
make such a decision.

    LINK TO LEARNING

    This short video goes inside a manufacturing process (https://openstax.org/l/50Manufacturing) to show
    you how machines, people, planning, implementation, efficiency, and costs interact to arrive at a finished
    product.

Service organizations also face decisions that require more detailed information than is available in financial
accounting statements. A company's financial statements aggregate information for the company as a whole,
but for most managerial decisions, information must be gathered in a timely manner at a product, customer,
or division level. For example, the management of City Hospital is considering the purchase of four new
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) machines that scan three times faster than their current machines and
thus would allow the hospital's imaging department to evaluate eight additional patients each day. Each

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers                                                           15

machine costs $425,000 and will last five years before needing to be replaced. Would this be a wise investment
for City Hospital? Hospital management would need the appropriate information to assess the alternatives in
order to make this decision. Throughout your study of managerial accounting, you will learn about the types
of information needed to make these decisions, as well as techniques for analyzing this information. First, it is
important to understand the various roles managers play in the organization in order to understand the types
of information and the level of detail that are needed. Most of the job responsibilities of a manager fit into one
of three categories: planning, controlling, or evaluating.

The model in Figure 1.2 sums up the three primary responsibilities of management and the managerial
accountant's role in the process. As you can see from the model, the function of accomplishing an entity's
mission statement is a circular, ongoing process.

Figure 1.2 The Process of Adhering to the Mission Statement. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Planning

One of the first items on a new company's agenda is the creation of a mission statement. A mission
statement is a short statement of a company's purpose and focus. This statement should be broad enough
that it will encompass future growth and changes of the company. Table 1.2 contains the mission statement of
three different types of companies: a manufacturer, an e-commerce company, and a service company.

Company                                      Sample Mission Statements

Dow                                                           Mission Statement
Chemical
           "To passionately create innovation for our stakeholders at the intersection of chemistry,
Starbucks  biology, and physics."[1]

           "To inspire and nurture the human spirit--one person, one cup, and one neighborhood at a
           time."[2]

Table 1.2

1 "Mission and Vision." DOW. https://www.dow.com/en-us/about-dow/our-company/mission-and-vision
16       Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers

Company                                    Sample Mission Statements
Google
                                                            Mission Statement

         "Our mission is to organize the world's information and make it universally accessible and
         useful."[3]

Table 1.2

Once the mission of the company has been determined, the company can begin the process of setting goals,
or what the company expects to accomplish over time, and objectives, or the targets that need to be met in
order to meet the company's goals. This is known as planning. Planning occurs at all levels of an organization
and can cover various periods of time. One type of planning, called strategic planning, involves setting
priorities and determining how to allocate corporate resources to help an organization accomplish both short-
term and long-term goals. For example, one hotel may want to be the low-price, no-frills, clean alternative,
while another may decide to be the superior quality, high-price luxury hotel with many amenities. Obviously,
to be successful, either of these businesses must determine the goals necessary to meet their particular
strategy.

Typically, a strategic plan will span any number of years an organization chooses (three, five, seven, or even
ten years), and often companies will have multiple strategic plans, such as one for three years, one for five
years, and one for ten years. Given the time length involved in many plans, the organization also needs to
factor in the potential effects of changes in their senior executive leadership and the composition of the board
of directors.

What types of objectives are part of a strategic plan? Strategic objectives should be diverse and will vary from
company to company and from industry to industry, but some general goals can include maximizing market
share, increasing short-term profits, increasing innovation, offering the best value for the cost, maintaining
commitment to community programs, and exceeding environmental protection mandates.

From a managerial accounting perspective, planning involves determining steps or actions to meet the
strategic or other goals of the company. For example, Daryn's Dairy, a major producer of organic dairy
products in the Midwest, has made increasing the market share of its products one of its strategic goals.
However, to be truly effective, the goals need to be defined specifically. For example, the goals might be stated
in terms of percentage growth, both annually and in terms of the number of markets addressed in their
growth projections.

Also, Daryn's planning process would include the steps the company plans to use to implement to increase
market share. These plans may include current-year plans, five-year plans, and ten-year plans.

The current-year plan may be to sell the company's products in 10 percent more stores in the states in which it
currently operates. The five-year plan may be to sell the products internationally in three countries, and the
ten-year plan may be to acquire their chief competitor and, thus, their customers. Each of these plans will
require outlining specific steps to reach these goals and communicating those steps to the employees who will
carry out or have an impact on reaching these goals and implementing these plans.

Planning can involve financial and nonfinancial processes and measures. One planning tool discussed in
Budgeting is the budgeting process, which requires management to assess the resources--for example, time,

2 "Our Starbucks Mission Statement." Starbucks. https://www.starbucks.com/about-us/company-information/mission-statement
3 "About." Google. https://www.google.com/about/

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers  17

money, and number and type of employees needed--to meet current-year objectives. Budgeting often
includes both financial data, such as worker pay rates, and nonfinancial data, such as the number of
customers an employee can serve in a given time period.

A retail company can plan for the expected sales volume, a hospital can plan for the number of x-rays they
expect to administer, a law firm can plan the hours expected for the various types of legal services they
perform, a manufacturing firm can plan for the level of quality expected in each item produced, and a utility
company can plan for the level of air pollutants that are acceptable. Notice that in each of these examples, the
aspect of the business that is being planned and evaluated is a qualitative (nonfinancial) factor or
characteristic. In your study of managerial accounting, you will learn about many situations in which both
financial and nonfinancial data or information are equally relevant. However, the qualitative aspects are
typically not quantified in dollars but evaluated using some other standards, such as customers served or
students advised.

While these functions are initially stated in qualitative terms, most of these items would at some point be
translated into a dollar value or dollar effect. In each of these examples, the managerial accounting function
would help to determine the variables that would help appropriately measure the desired goal as well as plan
how to quantify these measures. However, measures are only useful if tracked and used to determine their
effectiveness. This is known as the control function of management.

Controlling

To measure whether plans are meeting objectives or goals, management must put in place ways to assess
success or lack of success. Controlling involves the monitoring of the planning objectives that were put into
place. For example, if you have a retail store and you have a plan to minimize shoplifting, you can implement a
control, such as antitheft tags that trigger an alarm when someone removes them from the store. You could
also install in the ceilings cameras that provide a different view of customers shopping and therefore may
catch a thief more easily or clearly. The antitheft tags and cameras serve as your controls against shoplifting.

Managerial accounting is a useful tool in the management control function. Managerial accounting helps
determine the appropriate controls for measuring the success of a plan. There are many types of controls that
a company can use. Some controls can be in the form of financial measures, such as the ratio for inventory
turnover, which is a measure of inventory control and is defined as Cost of Goods Sold ÷ Average Inventory, or
in the form of a performance measure, such as decreasing production costs by 10 percent to help guide or
control the decisions made by managers. Other controls can be physical controls, such as fingerprint
identification or password protection. Essentially, the controlling function in management involves helping to
coordinate the day-to-day activities of a business so that these activities lead to meeting corporate goals.

Without controls, it is very unlikely a plan would be successful, and it would be difficult to know if your plan
was a success. Consider the plan by Daryn's Dairy to increase market share. The plan for the first year was to
increase market share by selling the company's products in 10 percent more stores in the states in which the
company already operates. How will the company implement this plan? The implementation, or carrying out,
of the plan will require the company to put controls in place to measure which new stores are successfully
selling the company's products, which products are being sold the most, what the sales volume and dollar
value of the new stores are, and whether the sales in these new stores are affecting the volume of sales in
current stores. Without this information, the company would not know if the plan is reaching the desired result
of increased market share.

The control function helps to determine the courses of action that are taken in the implementation of a plan by
18                                                                                Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers

helping to define and administer the steps of the plan. Essentially, the control function facilitates coordination
of the plan within the organization. It is through the system of controls that the actual results of decisions
made in implementing a plan can be identified and measured. Managerial accounting not only helps to
determine and design control measures, it also assists by providing performance reports and control reports
that focus on variances between the planned objective performance and the actual performance. Control is
achieved through effective feedback, or information that is used to assess a process. Feedback allows
management to evaluate the results, determine whether progress is being made, or determine whether
corrective measures need to be taken. This evaluation is in the next management function.

Evaluating

Managers must ultimately determine whether the company has met the goals set in the planning phase.
Evaluating, also called assessing or analyzing, involves comparing actual results against expected results, and
it can occur at the product, department, division, and company levels. When there are deviations from the
stated objectives, managers must decide what modifications are needed.

The controls that were put into place to coordinate the implementation of a particular company plan must be
evaluated so that success can be measured, or corrective action can be taken. Consider Daryn's Dairy's one-
year plan to increase market share by selling products in 10 percent more stores in the states in which the
company currently operates. Suppose one of the controls put into place is to measure the sales in the current
stores to determine if selling the company's products in new stores is adding new sales or merely moving
sales from existing stores. This control measure, same-store sales, must be evaluated to determine the effect
of the decision to expand the selling of products within the state. This control measure will be evaluated by
comparing sales in the current year in those stores to sales from the prior year in those same stores. The
results of this evaluation will help guide management in their decision to move forward with their plan, to
modify the plan, or to scrap the plan.

As discussed previously, not all evaluations will involve quantitative or financial measures. In expanding
market share, the company wants to maintain or improve its reputation with customers and does not want the
planned increased availability or easier access to their products to decrease customer perceptions of the
products or the company. They could use customer surveys to evaluate the perceived effect on the company's
reputation as a result of implementing this one-year plan. However, there are many ways that companies can
evaluate various controls. In addition to the financial gauges, organizations are now measuring efficiencies,
customer development, employee retention, and sustainability.

Managers spend their time in various stages of planning, controlling, and evaluating. Generally, higher-level
managers spend more time on planning, whereas lower-level managers spend more time on evaluating. At
any level, managers work closely with the managerial accounting team to help in each of these stages.
Managerial accountants help determine whether plans are measurable, what controls should be implemented
to carry out a plan, and what are the proper means of evaluation of those controls. This would include the type
of feedback necessary for management to assess the results of their plans and actions. Management
accountants generate the reports and information needed to assess the results of the various evaluations, and
they help interpret the results.

To put this in context, think about how you will spend your weekend. First, you are the manager of your own
time. You must plan based on your workload and on how much time you will spend studying, exercising,
sleeping, and meeting with friends. You then control how your plan is implemented by setting self-imposed or
possibly group meeting-imposed deadlines, and last, you evaluate how well you carried out your plan by

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers                                                                  19

gathering more data--such as grades on assignments, personal fulfillment, and number of hours of sleep--to
determine if you met your plans (goals). Not planning, controlling, and evaluating often results in less-than-
desirable outcomes, such as late assignments, too little sleep, or bad grades. In this scenario, you did not need
a separate managerial accountant to help you with these functions, because you could manage planning,
controlling, and evaluating on your own. However, in the business world, most businesses will have both
managers and managerial accountants. Table 1.3 illustrates some examples.

             Relating Managerial Accounting Functions to Various Business Majors

             Sales                           Human Resources                 Logistics

Planning     What are our expected           How much should we budget       Should we invest in radio-
Controlling  sales for each product          for salary and wage increases   frequency identification
Evaluating   in each geographic              for the year?                   (RFID) processors to enable
             region?                         How much should we plan to      computer tracking of
             How much should be              spend on safety and training    inventory?
             budgeted for salaries           for the year?                   How much raw material
             and commissions for                                             should be ordered and
             our salespeople?                                                delivered to ensure timely
                                                                             delivery of our finished
                                                                             products to our customers?

             Are we meeting                  Is our projected budget for     Are our products being
             expected sales growth           wages and salaries sufficient?  delivered to our customers in
             in each region?                 Are we meeting our safety and   a timely manner, and at what
             Are each of the                 training goals?                 cost?
             salespeople meeting                                             Are we dealing with stock-
             their sales projections?                                        outs in inventory? If so, what
                                                                             is that costing us?

             How do our actual sales         Would it be cheaper to hire     What are the cost differences
             compare to our                  temporary employees to get      in starting our own delivery
             forecasted or budgeted          through our "busy" season or    service versus continuing to
             sales?                          to pay our current employees    use other carriers?
             What sales promotions           for overtime?                   Should we outsource the
             are our competitors                                             manufacturing of a
             offering, and what                                              component part or continue
             effect is it having on                                          to make it ourselves? What
             our market share?                                               are the price differences?

Table 1.3
20                                                                                Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers

    YOUR TURN

    Evaluating On-Campus versus Off-Campus Living

    The principal purpose of managerial accounting is to deliver information useful for management
    decision-making. Many of the techniques used in managerial accounting are useful for decisions in your
    everyday life. In choosing whether to live on campus or off campus, how might you use planning,
    controlling, and evaluating in your decision-making process? What types of financial and nonfinancial
    information might you need?

    Solution

    Planning:

      · Creating a list of financial and nonfinancial goals to be accomplished in your next year in college
      · Determining how much each alternative will cost, including utilities, food, and transportation, and

          creating a budget

    Controlling:

      · Using an expense recording app to monitor your expenses
      · Monitoring the effectiveness of your study time as reflected in your grades
      · Monitoring your physical health to measure if your living arrangements are conducive to staying

          healthy

    Evaluating:

      · Assessing the effectiveness of your living arrangements by measuring your grades, bank account,
          and general happiness

    Financial:

      · Cost of staying in dorm versus the cost of an apartment or house
      · Estimate of differences in other costs, such as utilities, food, and additional transportation

    Nonfinancial:

      · Convenience of location of dorm versus apartment or house
      · Quality of living experience including number of roommates, ability to have own room, study

          environment differences
      · Length of rental term of dorm versus apartment or house
      · Where you plan to live in the summer, what you plan to do during that time

    THINK IT THROUGH

    US Small Business Administration

    Many students who study managerial accounting will work for a small business, and some may even own
    a small business. In order to operate a small business, you need an understanding of managerial

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers                                                           21

accounting, among other skills. The US Small Business Administration is an agency within the federal
government that has the sole purpose of supporting small businesses. You can find a plethora of
information on their website, https://www.sba.gov/.

 1. What are some of the steps in creating a small business?
 2. What are the top ten reasons given for a business failure?
 3. How could an understanding of managerial accounting help a small business owner?

 1.2 Distinguish between Financial and Managerial Accounting

Now that you have a basic understanding of managerial accounting, consider how it is similar to and different
from financial accounting. After completing a financial accounting class, many students do not look forward to
another semester of debits, credits, and journal entries. Thankfully, managerial accounting is much different
from financial accounting. Also known as management accounting or cost accounting, managerial accounting
provides information to managers and other users within the company in order to make more informed
decisions. The overriding roles of managers (planning, controlling, and evaluating) lead to the distinction
between financial and managerial accounting. The main objective of management accounting is to provide
useful information to managers to assist them in the planning, controlling, and evaluating roles.

Unlike managerial accounting, financial accounting is governed by rules set out by the Financial Accounting
Standards Board (FASB), an independent board made up of accounting professionals who determine and
publicize the standards of financial accounting and reporting in the United States. Larger, publicly traded
companies are also governed by the US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), in the form of the
generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), the common set of rules, standards, and procedures that
publicly traded companies must follow when they are composing their financial statements.

Financial accounting provides information to enable stockholders, creditors, and other stakeholders to make
informed decisions. This information can be used to evaluate and make decisions for an individual company or
to compare two or more companies. However, the information provided by financial accounting is primarily
historical and therefore is not sufficient and is often synthesized too late to be overly useful to management.
Managerial accounting has a more specific focus, and the information is more detailed and timelier.
Managerial accounting is not governed by GAAP, so there is unending flexibility in the types of reports and
information gathered. Managerial accountants regularly calculate and manage "what-if" scenarios to help
managers make decisions and plan for future business needs. Thus, managerial accounting focuses more on
the future, while financial accounting focuses on reporting what has already happened. In addition,
managerial accounting uses nonfinancial data, whereas financial accounting relies solely on financial data.

For example, Daryn's Dairy makes many different organic dairy products. Daryn's managers need to track
their costs for certain jobs. One of the company's top-selling ice creams is their seasonal variety; a new flavor
is introduced every three months and sold for only a six-month period. The cost of these specialty ice creams is
different from the cost of the standard flavors for reasons such as the unique or expensive ingredients and the
specialty packaging. Daryn wants to compare the costs involved in making the specialty ice cream and those
involved in making the standard flavors of ice cream. This analysis will require that Daryn track not only the
cost of materials that go into the product, but also the labor hours and cost of the labor, plus other costs,
known as overhead costs (rent, electricity, insurance, etc.), that are incurred in producing the various ice
creams. Once the total costs for both the specialty ice cream and the standard flavored ice cream are known,
the cost per unit can be determined for each type. These types of analyses help a company evaluate how to set
22                                                                                Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers

pricing, evaluate the need for new or substitute ingredients, manage product additions and deletions, and
make many other decisions. Figure 1.3 shows an example of a materials cost analysis by Daryn's Dairy used to
compare the materials cost for producing 500 gallons of their best-selling standard flavor--vanilla--with one
of their specialty ice creams--Very Berry Biscotti.

Figure 1.3 Material Cost Analysis. Daryn's Dairy materials cost comparison analysis between best-selling
standard vanilla ice cream and Very Berry Biscotti, a limited-edition specialty ice cream. (attribution: Copyright
Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Financial and Managerial Accounting Comparative

Managerial and financial accounting are used by every business, and there are important differences in their
reporting functions. Those differences are detailed in Figure 1.4.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers  23

Figure 1.4 Comparing Reports between Financial and Managerial Accounting. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Users of Reports

The information generated from the reports of financial accountants tends to be used primarily by external
users, including the creditors, tax authorities and regulators, investors, customers, competitors, and others
outside the company, who rely on the financial statements and annual reports to access information about a
company in order to make more informed decisions. Since these external people do not have access to the
documents and records used to produce the financial statements, they depend on Generally Applied
Accounting Principles (GAAP). These outside users also depend greatly on the preparation of audits that are
done by public accounting firms, under the guidelines and standards of either the American Institute of
Certified Public Accountants (AICPA), the US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), or the Public
Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB).

Managerial accounting information is gathered and reported for a more specific purpose for internal users,
those inside the company or organization who are responsible for managing the company's business interests
and executing decisions. These internal users may include management at all levels in all departments,
owners, and other employees. For example, in the budget development process, a company such as Tesla may
want to project the costs of producing a new line of automobiles. The managerial accountants could create a
budget to estimate the costs, such as parts and labor, and after the manufacturing process has begun, they
can measure the actual costs, thus determining if they are over or under their budgeted amounts. Although
24  Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers

outside parties might be interested in this information, companies like Tesla, Microsoft, and Boeing spend
significant amounts of time and money to keep their proprietary information secret. Therefore, these internal
budget reports are only available to the appropriate users. While you can find a cost of goods sold schedule in
the financial statements of publicly traded companies, it is difficult for outside parties to break it down in order
to identify the individual costs of products and services.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Investopedia is considered to be the largest Internet financial education resource in the world. There are
   many short, helpful videos that explain various concepts of managerial accounting. Watch this video
   explaining managerial accounting and how useful it can be to many different types of managers
   (https://openstax.org/l/50ManageAccount) to learn more.

Types of Reports

Financial accounting information is communicated through reporting, such as the financial statements. The
financial statements typically include a balance sheet, income statement, cash flow statement, retained
earnings statement, and footnotes. Managerial accounting information is communicated through reporting as
well. However, the reports are more detailed and more specific and can be customized. One example of a
managerial accounting report is a budget analysis (variance report) as shown in Figure 1.5. Other reports can
include cost of goods manufactured, job order cost sheets, and production reports. Since managerial
accounting is not governed by GAAP or other constraints, it is important for the creator of the reports to
disclose all assumptions used to make the report. Since the reports are used internally, and not typically
released to the general public, the presentation of any assumptions does not have to follow any industry-wide
guidelines. Each organization is free to structure its reports in the format that organizes its information in the
best way for it.

Figure 1.5 Example of a Budget (Variance) Analysis. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under
CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
This type of analysis helps management to evaluate how effective they were at carrying out the plans and
meeting the goals of the corporation. You will see many examples of reports and analyses that can be used as
tools to help management make decisions.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers                                                                 25

THINK IT THROUGH

Projection Error

You are working as the accountant in the special projects and budgets area of Sturm, Ruger & Company,
a law firm that currently specializes in bankruptcy law. In order to serve their customers better and more
efficiently, the company is trying to decide whether or not to expand its services and offer credit
counseling, credit monitoring, credit rebuilding, and identity protection services. The president comes to
you and asks for some sales and revenue projections. He would like the projections in three days' time so
that he can present the results to the board at the annual meeting.

You work tirelessly for two straight days compiling projections of sales and revenues to prepare the
reports. The report is provided to the president just before the board is to arrive.

When you return to your office, you start clearing away some of the materials that you used in your
report, and you discover an error that makes all of your projections significantly overstated. You ask the
president's administrative assistant if the president has presented the report to the board, and you find
that he had mentioned it but not given the full report as of yet.

What would you do?

  · What are the ethical concerns in this matter?
  · What would be the results of telling the president of your error?
  · What would be the results of not telling the president of your error?

Frequency of Reports

The financial statements are typically generated quarterly and annually, although some entities also require
monthly statements. Much work is involved in creating the financial statements, and any adjustments to
accounts must be made before the statements can be produced. A physical count inventory must be done to
adjust the inventory and cost of goods sold accounts, depreciation must be calculated and entered, all prepaid
asset accounts must be reviewed for adjustments, and so forth. The annual reports are not finalized for several
weeks after the year-end, because they are based on historical data; for a company that is traded on one of
the major or regional stock exchanges, it must have an audit of the financial statements conducted by an
independent certified public accountant. This audit cannot be completed until after the end of the company's
fiscal year, because the auditors need access to all of the information for the company for that year. For
companies that are privately held, an audit is not normally required. However, potential lenders might require
an independent audit.

Conversely, managers can quickly attain managerial accounting information. No external, independent
auditors are needed, and it is not necessary to wait until the year-end. Projections and estimates are adequate.
Managers should understand that in order to obtain information quickly, they must accept less precision in the
reporting. While there are several reports that are created on a regular basis (e.g., budgets and variance
reports), many management reports are produced on an as-needed basis.

Purpose of Reports

The general purpose of financial statement reporting is to provide information about the results of operations,
26                                                                                Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers

financial position, and cash flows of an organization. This data is useful to a wide range of users in order to
make economic decisions. The purpose of the reporting done by management accountants is more specific to
internal users. Management accountants make available the information that could assist companies in
increasing their performance and profitability. Unlike financial reports, management reporting centers on
components of the business. By dividing the business into smaller sections, a company is able to get into the
details and analyze the smallest segments of the business.

An understanding of managerial accounting will assist anyone in the business world in determining and
understanding product costs, analyzing break-even points, and budgeting for expenses and future growth
(which will be covered in other parts of this course). As a manager, chief executive officer, or owner, you need
to have information available at hand to answer these types of questions:

  · Are my profits higher this quarter over last quarter?
  · Do I have enough cash flow to pay my employees?
  · Are my jobs priced correctly?
  · Are my products priced correctly in order for me to make the profit I need to make?
  · Who are my most productive and least productive employees?

In the world of business, information is power; stated simply, the more you know, typically, the better your
decisions can be. Managerial accounting delivers data-driven feedback for these decisions that can assist in
improving decision-making over the long term. Business managers can leverage this powerful tool in order to
make their businesses more successful, because management accounting adds value to common business
decision-making. All of this readily available information can lead to great improvements for any business.

Focus of Reports

Because financial accounting typically focuses on the company as a whole, external users of this information
choose to invest or loan money to the entire company, not to a department or division within the company.
Therefore, the global focus of financial accounting is understandable.

However, the focus of management accounting is typically different. Managerial reporting is more focused on
divisions, departments, or any component of a business, down to individuals. The mid-level and lower-level
managers are typically responsible for smaller subsets within the company.

Managers need accounting reports that deal specifically with their division and their specific activities. For
instance, production managers are responsible for their specific area and the results within their division.
Accordingly, these production managers need information about results achieved in their division, as well as
individual results of departments within the division. The company can be broken into segments based on
what managers need--for example, geographic location, product line, customer demographics (e.g., gender,
age, race), or any of a variety of other divisions.

Nature of Reports

Both financial reports and managerial reports use monetary accounting information, or information relating
to money or currency. Financial reports use data from the accounting system that is gathered from the
reporting of transactions in the form of journal entries and then aggregated into financial statements. This
information is monetary in nature. Managerial accounting uses some of the same financial information as
financial accounting, but much of that information will be broken down to a more detailed level. For example,
in financial reporting, net sales are needed for the income statement. In managerial accounting, the quantity
and dollar value of the sales of each product are likely more useful. In addition, managerial accounting uses a

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers                                                                  27

significant amount of nonmonetary accounting information, such as quantity of material, number of
employees, number of hours worked, and so forth, which does not relate to money or currency.

Verification of Reports

Financial reports rely on structure. They are generated using accepted principles that are enforced through a
vast set of rules and guidelines, also known as GAAP. As mentioned previously, companies that are publicly
traded are required to have their financial statements audited on an annual basis, and companies that are not
publicly traded also may be required to have their financial statements audited by their creditors. The
information generated by the management accountants is intended for internal use by the company's
divisions, departments, or both. There are no rules, guidelines, or principles to follow. Managerial accounting
is much more flexible, so the design of the managerial accounting system is difficult to standardize, and
standardization is unnecessary. It depends on the nature of the industry. Different companies (even different
managers within the same company) require different information. The most important issue is whether the
reporting is useful for the planning, controlling, and evaluation purposes.

   YOUR TURN

   Daryn's Dairy

Figure 1.6 Assorted Ice Cream Flavors. (credit: "Assorted Ice Creams" by "jeshoots"/Pexel, CC0)

Suppose you have been hired by Daryn's Dairy as a market analyst. Your first assignment is to evaluate
the sales of various standard and specialty ice creams within the Midwest region where Daryn's Dairy
operates. You also need to determine the best-selling flavors of ice cream in other regions of the United
States as well as the selling patterns of the flavors. For example, do some flavors sell better than others
at different times of the year, or are some top sellers sold as limited-edition flavors? Remember that one
of the strategic goals of the company is to increase market share, and the first step in meeting this goal
is to sell their product in 10 percent more stores within their current market, so your research will help
upper-level management carry out the company's goals. Where would you gather the information? What
type of information would you need? Where would you find this information? How would the company
determine the impact of this type of change on the business? If implemented, what information would
28  Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers

    you need to assess the success of the plan?

    Solution

    Answers will vary. Sample answer:

    Where would you gather the information? Where would you find this information?

      · Current company sales information would be obtained from internal company reports and records
          that detail the sale of each type of ice cream including volume, cost, price, and profit per flavor.

      · Sales of ice cream from other companies may be more difficult to obtain, but the footnotes and
          supplemental information to the annual reports of those companies being analyzed, as well as
          industry trade journals, would likely be good sources of information.

    What types of information would you need?

      · Some of the types of information that would be needed would be the volume of sales of each flavor
          (number of gallons), how long each flavor has been sold, whether seasonal or limited-edition flavors
          are produced and sold only once or are on a rotating basis, the size of the market being examined
          (number of households), whether the other companies sell similar products (organic, all natural,
          etc.), the median income of consumers or other information to assess the consumers' willingness to
          pay for organic products, and so forth.

    How would Daryn's Dairy determine the impact of this type of change on the business?

      · Management would evaluate the cost to expand into new stores in their current market compared
          to the potential revenues from selling their products in those stores in order to assess the ability of
          the potential expansion to generate a profit for the company.

    If implemented, what information would Daryn's Dairy need to assess the success of the plan?

      · Management would measure the profitability of selling any new products, expanding into new
          stores in their current market, or both to determine if the implementation of the plan was a success.
          If the plan is a success and the company is generating profits, the company will continue to figure
          out ways to improve efficiency and profitability. If the plan is not a success, the company will
          determine the reasons (cost to produce too high, sales price too high, volume too low, etc.) and
          make a new plan.

 1.3 Explain the Primary Roles and Skills Required of Managerial Accountants

It is clear that management accountants must have a solid foundation in accounting, in both financial and
managerial accounting, but other than accounting skills, what makes good managerial accountants?

  · They must have knowledge of the business in which they are working. Commercial awareness is
      knowing how a business is run and how it is influenced by the external environment and knowing and
      understanding the overall industry within which the business is operating.

  · Collaboration, which involves working in cross-functional teams and earning the trust and respect of
      colleagues in order to complete a task, is vital to improving managerial accounting talents. They should
      be "team players."

  · Management accountants should have effective communication skills that allow them to convey

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers                                                                                     29

      accounting information in both written and oral forms in a way that the intended audience can
      understand. Being able to gather the data quickly and accurately is important, but the data is
      meaningless if it is not presented in an intuitive style that the audience can understand.
  · Strong technology skills are also essential. These skills include not only accounting and reporting software
      but also other programs that would assist in automating processes, improving efficiencies, and adding
      value to the company. For many companies, additional software and accompanying technology are often
      needed for both their financial and managerial accounting functions. For example, enterprise resource
      planning (ERP) systems often play a major role in the creation of comprehensive accounting systems. This
      additional support is often provided by outside suppliers such as Hyperion, Cognos, Sage, SAP,
      PeopleSoft, and Oracle.
  · Managerial accountants must possess extensive analytical skills. They must regularly work with financial
      analysts and management personnel to find ways to reduce expenses and analyze budgets. These skills
      include the ability to envision, verbalize, conceptualize, or solve both multifaceted and simplistic problems
      by making choices that make sense with the given information.
  · Managerial accountants must have ethics and values. They should be an example to others and
      encourage them to follow internal control practices and procedures. Ethics is discussed in more detail in
      Describe the role of the Institute of Management Accountants and the use of ethical standards.

Managers at all levels make many different types of decisions every day, but to make most decisions, they
need specific information. Some information is easily obtainable, and some is not. Managers do not always
know what information they need or what is available, and they need to know if the decisions they make are
having the desired outcome and meeting specific goals.

To this point, we've described managerial accounting as a process. The following definition considers it a
profession. Management accountants are the individuals who help management with this information. The
Institute of Management Accountants (IMA) defines management accounting as "a profession that involves
partnering in management decision making, devising planning and performance management systems, and
providing expertise in financial reporting and control to assist management in the formulation and
implementation of an organization's strategy."[4]

The IMA also reports that nearly 75 percent of financial professionals work in business as management
accountants in positions such as financial analysts, accounting managers, controllers, and chief financial
officers.[5] These professionals have a significant impact on businesses through influencing the decision-
making process and business strategy.

Management accountants work at various levels of the organization, from the project level to the division level
to the controller and chief financial officer. Often, management accountants work where they are needed and
not necessarily at corporate headquarters. They tend to be hands-on in the decision-making process. They
need many types of information to inform the many decisions they must make.

4 "Management Accounting Careers." Institute of Management Accountants. https://www.imanet.org/students/management-accounting-
careers?ssopc=1
5 "Management Accounting Careers." Institute of Management Accountants. https://www.imanet.org/students/management-accounting-
careers?ssopc=1
30                                                                                Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers

    CONTINUING APPLICATION AT WORK

    Who Uses Managerial Accounting?

    When most people think of an accounting job, they think of someone who does taxes or who puts
    together financial statements. However, almost all jobs use accounting information, particularly
    managerial accounting information. Table 1.4 shows how certain professions might use managerial
    accounting information. Can you think of other examples?

    Profession                     Use of Managerial Accounting Information
    Engineer                        How They Use Managerial Accounting in Their Industry
                Properly track and report the use of resources involved in an engineering project;
    Mayor       measure and communicate costs of a project and its outcomes
                Put together a budget, a planning and control mechanism that plays an important role
    Nurse       in every government
    Mechanic    Track operating or service costing per patient, or per unit
    Retail      Use job costing to figure total costs and overall profitability on each job
    store       Forecast inventory needs, review profit margins, and track sales margins on individual
    manager     products as well as entire stores
    Restaurant
    owner       Calculate the cost of serving a single table by estimating the cost of the food plus time
    Architect   of server, keep food costs under control through inventory tracking
    Farmer      Track direct and indirect costs for each job; track profitability per job
                Calculate yields per field, analyze fertilizer and seeding rates, and control waste

    Table 1.4

Organizational Structure

Most companies have an organizational chart that displays the configuration and the delegation of authority
in the decision-making processes (Figure 1.7). The structure helps define roles and responsibilities. The
organizational charts provide guidance to employees and other stakeholders by outlining the official reporting
affiliations that direct the workflow within the organization. If the company is particularly efficient, it also will
include contact information within the chart. This is a convenient directory to circulate among employees. It
helps them find a particular person in a certain position, or determine whom to speak to about certain areas
within the company, or even identify a specific person's supervisor to report positive or negative work
behavior.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers  31

Figure 1.7 Sample Organizational Chart. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-
SA 4.0 license)

Stockholders of a company are the owners; however, they elect a board of directors to manage that company
for them. The board selects the officers who will implement the policies and strategic goals that the board has
set in place. The chief executive officer (CEO) is the corporation officer who has the overall responsibility for
the management of the company. The person overseeing all of the accounting and finance concerns is the
chief financial officer (CFO). This individual is in charge of the financial planning and record-keeping of the
organization and reports to the CEO. The controller is responsible for the accounting side of the business
(accounting records, financial statements, tax returns, and internal reports) and reports to the CFO. Also
reporting to the CFO is the treasurer, who is in control of the finance side of the business (cash position,
corporation funds). An additional area that sometimes falls under the control of the CFO is the internal audit
staff. Internal auditors supply independent assurance that a company's internal control processes are
effective. However, there is strong support for keeping the internal audit staff outside of the CFO, because of a
possible conflict of interest.
32                                                                                Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers

    THINK IT THROUGH

    Managing Cash Flow

    Assume you are the managerial accountant at Anchor Head Brewery, a Midwest craft brewery that
    distributes nationwide. Its year-end is December 31. Because of poor cash flow management, the CFO
    has some concerns about having enough cash to be able to pay the tax bill that is expected. In early
    December, the purchasing department bought excess hops, barley, malt, oats, and yeast in anticipation
    of brewing more beer for the holiday and Super Bowl seasons. In order to decrease the company's net
    income, thereby reducing their taxable income, the CFO tells you to enter the purchase of this inventory
    as part of the "Supplies Expense" in the current year.

     1. In which account should these materials be recorded?
     2. How should you reply to this request?
     3. Should you bring this matter to another executive officer?

Careers

The field of managerial accounting, or corporate accounting, is composed of the financial and accounting
responsibilities required to operate any type of business. Managerial accountants are employed within
organizations to monitor costs, sales, budgets, and spending; conduct audits; predict future requirements;
and aid the executive leaders of the organization with financial decision-making.

Figure 1.8 lists approximate salaries for several financial and managerial accounting employment positions. In
reviewing the salary information, be aware that there are often major variances in salaries based on
geographical locations. For example, a cost accountant manager in San Francisco, California, would typically be
paid significantly more than an accountant in a similar position in Fayetteville, Arkansas. However, the cost of
living, especially housing costs, in San Francisco is also significantly higher than the cost of living in
Fayetteville.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers  33

Figure 1.8 Accounting Position Salaries. Salaries are shown for some entry-level and advanced-level jobs
available with an accounting degree. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
license)

Managerial accountants find employment opportunities in a wide variety of settings and industries.
Professionals in this discipline are in high demand from public and private companies, government agencies,
and not-for-profit entities (NFPs). Some areas of management accounting are versatile to any sector
(corporate, government, or NFP).

  · A financial analyst assists in preparing budgets, tracking actual costs, examining task performance,
      scrutinizing different types of variances, and supporting other management personnel in organizing
      forecasts and projections.

  · A budget analyst arranges and manages the master budget and compares master budget projections to
      actual results. This individual must be vastly aware of all operations in the budget and work closely with
      the rest of the accounting staff as well as management personnel.

  · An internal auditor typically reports to high-level executives within the company. An internal auditor is
      often called on to investigate budget variances, industrial sabotage, poor work quality, fraud, and theft.
      He or she also safeguards the internal controls and confirms they are working and effective.

  · A cash-management accountant has responsibilities that include transferring monies between
      accounts, monitoring deposits and payments, reconciling cash balances, creating and tracking cash
      forecasts, and performing all other cash-related financial processes.

Other areas of managerial accounting are specific to the sector in which accountants work. For example, the
area of cost accounting is more specific to the corporate or manufacturing sector. These cost accountants
amass large sums of data, checking for accuracy and then formulating the cost of raw materials, work in
process, finished goods, labor, overhead, and other associated manufacturing costs.

Governmental entities also use accounting to communicate with their constituents. Government agencies
34                                                                                Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers

include all levels of government, federal, state, county, and city, including military, law enforcement, airports,
and school systems. Government accountants deal with budgets, auditing, and payroll, the same as all other
managerial accountants. However, they must follow a different set of accounting rules called the
Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB).

Nonprofit (not-for-profit) organizations are tax-exempt organizations that serve their communities in a
variety of areas, such as religion, education, social services, health care, and the arts. Managerial accountants
in this area are most often focused on budgets. The biggest difference between a corporate budget analyst
and a nonprofit budget analyst is that the nonprofit analyst works the budget backward, compared to the
corporate analyst. For example, if a corporation was selling widgets, its budget would start with a sales
forecast of how many widgets the company thinks it can sell. This gives the company a forecast of how much it
can spend on expenses and fixed assets. The nonprofit budget analysts often start with the expenses. They
forecast how much the expenses will be in order to continue to offer their service to the community. From
there, they then adjust how much they will need to obtain through fundraising, donations, grants, or other
sources to meet their expenses.

   YOUR TURN

   Career Planning

   All companies need to plan ahead in order to continuously move forward. Their top management must
   take into consideration where they want the company to be in the next three to five years. Just like a
   company, you also need to consider where you want to be in three to five years, and you need to start
   taking strides now to accomplish what it is you need to in order to get there (Figure 1.9).

    Figure 1.9  Career Planning. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
    license)

    Answer the following:

     1. What job would you like to be doing in three to five years? What is your plan for getting there?
          Identify five to ten steps needed.

     2. Do you have a specific company you would like to be working for in the next three to five years?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers                                                                  35

      What are the reasons you want to work for them?
 3. In order to acquire the position you want, at the company you want, you need a résumé. Your

      résumé is like the company report of "you." It needs to offer reliable information about your
      experiences and achievements. What are the basic elements of a résumé, and how will you provide
      reassurance that the information on your résumé is trustworthy?

Solution

Answers will vary. Sample answer:

 1. I would like to own my own home remodeling company. Steps to get there include the following:
        A. complete double major in business and building construction
       B. in the summers before graduation, work for a local handyman franchise
        C. after graduation, work for a home builder as a project manager
       D. while working, save money for five years to be used to start my own company
        E. put together a business plan
        F. start my own business six years after graduation

 2. I would like to work for a national home builder such as Pulte or Toll Brothers. Ideally, I would have
      an internship with one of them during college. I would like to work for a national builder or a large
      regional builder because they already have a good business model and I could learn how that
      works.

 3. My résumé needs to contain my education information such as the degree and my majors as well as
      classes that are pertinent to my career. It should also indicate all of my work experience and any
      particular skills or certifications I have achieved, such as Eagle Scout. An example of how this
      information may be presented on a résumé can be seen in Figure 1.10.
36                Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers

    Figure 1.10   Sample Résumé. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA
    4.0 license)

Certifications

There are many distinct accounting certifications that accountants can earn in order to improve their careers,
attain promotions, and acquire raises in their pay. The certifications are somewhat different from each other
and focused toward different career paths. Many accountants have more than one of these credentials to
diversify their paths.
The Certified Public Accountant (CPA) is considered the top tier in accounting certifications. Many

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers  37

companies or positions require CPA certification. For example, most employees at accounting firms earn a CPA
certificate within the first few of years of graduation. Some positions, such as controller or CFO, often require
CPA certification. In the United States, each state has different educational and experience requirements in
order to obtain the CPA. The certification requires passing the four-part CPA exam as well. This is administered
by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA). There are four parts to the exam: Financial
Accounting and Reporting (FAR), Auditing and Attestation (AUD), Regulation (REG), and Business Environment
and Concepts (BEC). Each part is graded on a 100-point scale. A score of seventy-five or greater must be
achieved in order to pass each section. The exams can be intimidating, as it is a difficult process to go through.
As of 2017, the AICPA reported a pass rate of less than 50 percent, which may contribute to its high regard
around the world. After passing the CPA exam, candidates must work for one year under the supervision of a
licensed CPA before their own license is approved by a state regulatory agency. Those certified in public
accounting work in all areas of accounting. However, do not assume that being a CPA is the only way to secure
an excellent position in accounting.

The Certified Management Accountant (CMA) is another top-tiered certification for accountants. The CMA
title identifies the individual as a specialist in corporate accounting management. The CMA has some overlap
with the CPA, but the CPA is focused more on compliance, tax, and controls. CMAs favor financial analytics,
budgeting, and strategic assessment. This certification requires the minimum of a bachelor's degree from an
accredited college or university, two years of work experience, and successfully passing both parts of the
exam. Part one of the exam covers financial reporting, planning, performance, and controls. Part two focuses
on financial decision-making. The exam is administered by the IMA and has a 50 percent passing rate globally.

Not as popular in the United States as the CPA, the Certified Financial Analyst (CFA) certification is more in
demand throughout Europe and Asia. This certification prepares accountants for a career in the finance and
investment domains. Requirements of this credential include a bachelor's degree or four years' worth of
experience, plus passing all three sections of the exam. The exam is administered by the CFA Institute. There
are three separate exams, each one taking up to six hours to complete. The exams must be completed in
succession. This credential is considered one of the more rigorous ones to obtain, with a passing rate of less
than 45 percent.

The Enrolled Agent (EA) credential focuses on a career in taxation, whether it is working in tax preparation for
the public, internally for a corporation, or for the government at the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). The EA
certification was created by the IRS to signify significant knowledge of the US tax code and the ability to apply
the concepts of that code. Enrolled agents have the privilege of being able to sign tax returns as paid
preparers, and they are able to represent their clients in front of the IRS. The EA certification can be obtained
by passing a three-part exam covering all types of individual and business tax returns. Once the certification is
obtained, enrolled agents must follow strict ethical standards and complete 72 hours of continuing education
courses every three years.

The Certified Internal Auditor (CIA) is a credential offered by the Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA) and is
one of the only certifications that is accepted worldwide. CIAs tend to be employed in auditing areas within
government agencies, banking, finance, or corporations. They examine financial documents to investigate
deficiencies in internal controls. Requirements for this certification include a bachelor's degree, two years of
work experience in a related field, and passing the three sections of the examination. Also required are
providing character references, following a code of ethics, and continuing education.

The Certified Fraud Examiner (CFE) certification signifies proven proficiency in fraud prevention, detection,
and deterrence. CFEs are instructed in how to identify the red flags that may indicate fraudulent actions. The
designation is awarded by the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners (ACFE) after applicants have met the
38                                                                                Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers

following requirements: bachelor's degree, two years of work-related experience, moral character references,
and the passing of four separate exams.
The Certified Government Auditing Professional (CGAP) designation is exclusively for auditors employed
throughout the public sector (federal, state, local) and is offered by the IIA. Requirements for this credential
are the same as for the CIA. The exam has 115 multiple-choice questions and covers four areas focusing on
proficiency in generally accepted government auditing standards (GAGAS).
These certifications lead to different job responsibilities and different career paths. As indicated, each of the
certifications requires varying degrees of education and has exams that are unique to that particular
certification. All of these certifications also require a certain number of hours of continuing education in order
to keep the certification active. This ensures that the certificate holder is up to date on changes in the field.
There are always many opportunities throughout the year to obtain continuing education credits through
seminars, webinars, symposiums, and online and in-person classes.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Accounting.com has an application that will help to acquaint you with the different opportunities
   available, skill sets that may be required, and different salaries for accounting careers. See the Careers in
   Accounting report (https://openstax.org/l/50AccountCareer) for more information.

 1.4 Describe the Role of the Institute of Management Accountants and the
Use of Ethical Standards

As you've learned, unlike the specific rules set forth by GAAP and the SEC that govern financial accounting,
managerial accounting does not have specific rules and is considered flexible, as the reporting stays internal
and does not need to follow external rules. Managers of a business need detailed information in a timely
manner. This means that a managerial accountant needs to understand many detailed aspects of how the
company operates in addition to financial accounting methods, because the framework of typical
management reports often comes from the financial statements. However, the reports can be individualized
and customized to the information the manager is seeking. Each company has different strategies, timing, and
needs for information.

The Institute of Management Accountants (IMA), the professional organization for management
accountants, provides research, education, a means of knowledge sharing, and practice development to its
members. The IMA also issues the Certified Management Accountant (CMA) certification to those accountants
who meet the educational requirements, pass the rigorous two-part exam, and maintain continuing
professional education requirements. The CMA exam covers essential managerial accounting topics as well as
topics on economics and finance. Many accountants hold both CMA and CPA certifications.

Business Ethics

The IMA also develops standards and principles to help management accountants deal with ethical challenges.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers  39

Trust is an important cornerstone of business interactions, both internal and external. When there is a lack of
trust, it changes how decisions are made. Trust develops when there are good ethics: when people know right
from wrong. Consider these three questions as put forth by the Institute of Business Ethics: (1) Do I mind
others knowing what I have done? (2) Who does my decision affect or hurt? (3) Would my decision be
considered fair to those affected? These questions can help evaluate the ethics of a decision.

Ethics is more than simply obeying laws; it involves doing the right thing as well as the legal thing. Many
companies have a code of conduct to help guide their employees. For example, Google has a code of ethics
that they expect all of their employees and board members to follow. Failing to do so can cause termination of
employment. The preface of the code includes "Don't be evil." They use that to show all employees and other
shareholders within Google that they are serious about ethics--that trust and respect are essential in
providing a great service to their customers.

The IMA has its own Statement of Ethical Professional Practice for its members. Managerial accountants
should never commit acts that violate the standards of ethics, and they should never ignore such deeds by
others within their companies. Many other professional organizations, across many different professions, have
codes of ethics. For example, there are codes of ethics for the AICPA, ACFE, Financial Executives International,
American Marketing Association, National Society of Professional Engineers, and the American Nurses
Association.

   ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

   Institute of Management Accountants (IMA) Ethical Standards

   Four standards of ethical conduct in management accountants' professional activities were developed by
   the Institute of Management Accountants. The four standards are competence, confidentiality, integrity,
   and credibility. Credibility is a key standard that is based on an accountant communicating information
   with fairness and objectivity, disclosing all information that is relevant to the intended users
   understanding, and disclosing "delays or deficiencies in information, timeliness, processing, or internal
   controls in conformance with organization policy and/or applicable law."[6]

Often, when we think of unethical behavior, we imagine large-scale scenarios involving tens of thousands of
dollars or more, but ethical issues are more likely faced on a small scale. For example, suppose you work for an
organization that makes and sells virtual reality headsets. Because of competition, your company has
decreased their forecasted sales for next year by 20 percent over the current year. In a meeting, the CEO
expressed concern over the effect of the decreased sales on the bonuses of upper-level executives, since their
bonus is tied to meeting income projections. The vice president of marketing suggested in the meeting that if
the company simply continued to produce the same number of headsets as they had in the previous year,
income levels may still be achieved in order for the bonuses to be awarded. This would involve the company
producing excess inventory with hopes of selling them, in order to achieve income levels sufficiently adequate
to be able to pay bonuses to executives. While a conflict of interest might not be intuitively obvious, the
company (and thus its managerial accountants) has an obligation to many stakeholders such as investors,
creditors, employees and the community. The obligation of a corporation to these stakeholders depends

6 Institute of Management Accountants. "Standards of Ethical Conduct for Management Accountants." AccountingVerse.
https://www.accountingverse.com/managerial-accounting/introduction/code-of-ethics.html
40                                                                                Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers

somewhat on the stakeholder. For example, the primary obligation to a creditor may be to make timely
payments, the obligation to the community may be to minimize negative environmental impact. Most
stakeholders to not have access to internal information or decisions and thus rely on management to be
ethical in their decision-making. The company may indeed be able to sell all that it produces, but given the
forecasted drop in sales, producing the same number of units as during the current year will likely lead to
unsellable inventory, the need to sell the units at a significant discount in order to dispose of them, or both.
Following the recommendation to produce more than forecasted sales might hurt the value of the company's
stock, which could hurt many categories of stakeholders who depend on the accountants and financial
analysts to protect their financial interests.

In addition to managing production and inventory, a budget and the entire budget process have an impact on
managerial decision-making. Suppose you are the manager of the research department of a pharmaceutical
company. Your budget includes the costs for various types of training for your staff. Because of the amount of
time spent in development of a highly promising medication to treat diabetes, your staff has not had time to
complete as much training during the current year as you had allowed for in the budget. You are concerned
that if you do not use the training money, your training budget will be decreased in the next budget cycle. To
prevent this from happening, you arrange for several online training sessions for your staff. These training
sessions are on the basics of laboratory safety. All of your staff is very experienced and current on this topic
and can likely go straight to the course completion quiz and complete it in a matter of minutes without actually
watching any of the ten modules. What would encourage a manager to schedule and spend money on training
that is not useful for the employees? While it is expected to stay within the budget, many managers will spend
any "excess" amounts remaining in the budget at the end of the fiscal year. This practice is known as "use it or
lose it." Managers do this to avoid having their budgets cut in the next fiscal year. Stated simply, management
spends everything in their budget regardless of the value added or the necessity. This is not ethical behavior
and is usually the result of a budgetary process that needs to be modified so that the possibility of being able
to pad the budget is removed or at least minimized.

All employees within a company are expected to act ethically within their business actions. This can sometimes
be difficult when the company itself almost promotes the idea of unethical actions. For example, Wells Fargo
started offering incentives to their employees who succeeded in selling to current customers other services
and products that the bank had to offer. This incentive created an unethical culture. Employees manufactured
fake accounts, credit cards, and other services in order to qualify for the bonuses. In the end, 5,300 employees
lost their jobs, and everyone learned a lesson on creating proper incentives. Executives who aspire to run an
ethical company can do so, if they change reward systems from "pay for performance" to more holistic values.
Examples of proper incentives include attendance rewards, merit rewards, team bonuses, overall profit
sharing, and stock options.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Most, if not all, major corporations have a code of ethics or a code of conduct. Read Google's Code of
   Conduct (https://openstax.org/l/50GoogleCode) and consider the following questions:

      · What is the basic foundation for their code of conduct? What do you think it means?
      · After reading their document, has it changed your opinion of the company?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers  41

      · Do you think having a code of ethics or a code of conduct really matters?

Ethics Legislation

In response to several corporate scandals, the United States Congress passed the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
(SOX), also known as the "public company accounting reform." It is a federal law (http://www.soxlaw.com/)
that was a far-reaching reform of business practices. Its focus is primarily on public accounting firms that act
as auditors of publicly traded corporations. The act intended to protect investors by enhancing the accuracy
and reliability of corporate financial statements and disclosures. Thousands of corporations now must confirm
that their accounting processes comply with SOX. The act itself is fairly detailed, but the most significant issues
for compliance are as follows:

  · Section 302. The CEO and CFO must review all financial reports and sign the report.
  · Section 404. All financial reports must be audited on an annual basis and must be accompanied by an

      internal control audit.
  · Section 806. Whistleblowers, or those who provide evidence of fraud, are afforded special protections.
  · Section 906. The criminal penalties for a fraudulent financial report are increased from pre-SOX. Penalties

      can be up to $5 million in fines and up to 25 years in prison.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   The Sarbanes-Oxley Act has been in place for many years now and has its champions and its critics. Read
   this 2017 article from Accounting Today on the benefits and negative impacts of the act
   (https://openstax.org/l/50SOAcctToday) to learn more. This article from ConnectUS discusses the
   benefits and negative impacts (https://openstax.org/l/50SOConnectUS) as well.

Individuals who work throughout the accounting profession have a significant responsibility to the general
public. Financial accountants deliver information about companies that the public uses to make major financial
decisions. There must be a level of trust and confidence in the ethical behavior of these accountants. Just like
others in the business world, accountants are confronted endlessly with ethical dilemmas. A high standard of
ethical behavior is expected of those employed in a profession. While ethical codes are helpful guidelines, the
rationale to act ethically must originate from within oneself, from personal morals and values. There are steps
that can provide an outline for examining ethical issues:

 1. Recognize the ethical issue at hand and those involved (employees, creditors, vendors, and community).
 2. Establish the facts of the situation (who, what, where, when, and how).
 3. Recognize the competing values related to the issue (confidentiality and conflict of interest).
 4. Determine alternative courses of action (do not limit yourself).
 5. Evaluate each course of action and how each relates to the values in step 3.
 6. Recognize the possible consequences of each course of action and how each affects those involved in

      step 1.
 7. Make a decision, and take a course of action.
42                                                                                Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers

8. Evaluate the decision. (Is the issue solved? Did it create other issues?)

 ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

 Ethical Dilemma

  You are about to sign a new client to a very large contract worth over $900,000. Your supervisor is under
  a lot of pressure to increase sales. He calls you into his office and tells you his future with the company is
  in jeopardy, and he asks you to include the revenue for the new contract in the sales figures for the
  quarter that ends today. You know the contract is a certainty, but the client is out of town and cannot
  possibly sign for at least a week. Use the eight steps in examining an ethical situation to determine how
  you would react to this situation.

One of the issues with ethics is that what one person, community, or even country considers unethical or
wrong may not be problematic for another person, community, or country, who see it as a way of doing
business. For example, bribery in the world of business happens when an organization or representative of an
organization gives money or other financial benefits to another individual, business, or official in order to gain
favor or to manipulate a business decision. Bribery in the United States is illegal. However, in Russia or China, a
bribe is sometimes one cost of doing business, so it is part of their culture and completely ordinary.

The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA) was implemented in 1977 in the aftermath of disclosures of bribery
of foreign bureaucrats by more than 400 US corporations. The law is broken down into two parts: the
antibribery section and the accounting section. The antibribery section specifically prohibits payments to
foreign government officials to aid in attaining or retaining business. This provision applies to all US persons
and foreign firms acting within the United States. It also requires corporations that are listed in the United
States to converge their accounting records with certain accounting provisions. These include making and
keeping records that fairly represent the transactions of the company and maintaining an acceptable system
of internal controls. Companies doing business outside the United States are obligated to follow this law and
dedicate resources to its compliance.

The accounting section of the FCPA requires a company to have good internal controls so a slush fund to pay
bribes cannot be created and maintained. A slush fund is a cash account that is often created for illegal
activities or payments that are not typically recorded on the books.

More details on the SOX and the FCPA are covered in such courses as auditing, intermediate accounting, cost
accounting, and business law.

   YOUR TURN

   Logistics Analyst

   As a corporate accountant, it is very important to understand both financial and managerial aspects of
   the company and industry in which you are working. In order to assist management in their roles of
   planning, controlling, and evaluating, an accountant needs to be aware not only of GAAP but also of the

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers                                                               43

products or services offered by the company, the processes by which those products or services are
produced, and pertinent facts about suppliers, customers, and competitors. Not having this knowledge
not only makes it more difficult for the corporate or managerial accountant to perform any assigned
duties, but there is also an ethical responsibility to be knowledgeable in order to offer assistance,
analysis, or recommendations to management or customers.

Assume you have been hired by Triumph Motorcycles as a new logistics analyst. In this position, you will
carry out such tasks as obtaining and analyzing information about your company's goods or services;
monitoring the production, service, and information processes and flow; and looking for ways to improve
efficiency of operations.

How would you go about obtaining the knowledge and understanding you will need to work for this
company? How would financial and managerial accounting concepts help you in understanding the
company and the industry as a whole?

Solution

Answers will vary. Sample answer:

Ways to learn about the company and industry include the company website, press or news releases,
industry trade journals, company internal documents such as procedure manuals and job descriptions,
and conversations or interviews with fellow employees at various levels of the organization. The more
knowledge you have regarding financial and managerial accounting, the better you can link the
operations of the organizations to financial results and the more easily you can ascertain both
efficiencies and inefficiencies in the organization.

 1.5 Describe Trends in Today's Business Environment and Analyze Their
Impact on Accounting

The business environment never rests. Regulations are always changing, global competition continues to
increase, and technology provides continual disruption. Management accounting is always evolving due to
changes in the business environment. The types of information needed and obtainable have changed
significantly over time.

Many areas of employment are impacting businesses and the managerial accounting function today. For
example, more than 60 percent of workers in the United States are employed within service industries, such as
government agencies, marketing firms, accounting firms, and airlines. The health-care and social service
industries have doubled in size. However, as the number of service jobs has increased, the number of
manufacturing jobs, as a percentage of all jobs, has been decreasing.[7] One of the primary reasons for the
decline in manufacturing jobs is automation and other technological changes.

How are service industries different from manufacturing organizations? The fundamental difference is the
product they sell. The service company, such as a marketing, legal, or consulting firm, produces intangible
goods, meaning that the product has no physical substance. Manufacturing companies produce tangible
goods, which customers can handle and see. This leads to another significant difference between
manufacturing companies and service firms: inventory. Service firms, unlike manufacturing, do not have large

7 Dr. Patricia Buckley. "Geographic Trends in Manufacturing Job Creation: Something Old, Something New." Deloitte Insight. September 25,
2017. https://www2.deloitte.com/insights/us/en/economy/behind-the-numbers/geographic-trends-in-manufacturing-job-creation.html
44                                                                                Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers

inventories, because there is no tangible product. Manufacturing will have inventories of raw materials, of
goods that are in the process of being produced and goods that have been completed but not yet sold.
Managerial accountants must track all of this information for manufacturing companies. However, managerial
accountants are still needed within service-based firms to track time, materials, and overhead. For example,
Boeing Company is a manufacturer of airplanes. Their accountants must track several different types of
inventory categories, direct labor, and overhead costs, among other things. One of Boeing's customers, Delta
Air Lines, is a service-based company. The managerial accountants for the airline also are responsible for
following costs, but their reports are targeted toward industry-specific measures such as operating margins,
revenue from passenger miles, load factors, and passenger yield, among others.

Much of managerial accounting focuses on manufacturing. However, the techniques used for cost accounting
for manufacturing companies also can be applied to service-based organizations. The former would develop a
cost of goods manufactured schedule, and the latter would need a cost of service schedule. The structure of
the reports is principally the same, but section headings would reflect the type of organization.

Technology

Business entities always look for ways to leverage technology. Any type of technology that can increase
production, reduce costs, or increase safety will attract attention from the business world. There are many
areas of technology that businesses have used already, but to continue reaping those benefits, these
companies need to adjust quickly with the ever-advancing business technology.

Companies have the ability to integrate many of their business processes through enterprise resource
planning (ERP) systems, which help companies streamline their operations and help management respond
quickly to change. Although they are expensive, these systems help alleviate the complications that arise from
business systems that do not coordinate with one another. For example, a company may have many different
individual systems for each function: human resources may have a system to track employees' insurance
benefits, training, and retirement programs, while payroll may have a program that tracks employees'
earnings, taxes, deductions, and direct deposit information. Much of the information human resources and
payroll collect is the same. Having one system with different silos is much more efficient than having two
separate systems. Management must be aware of and adapt to whichever type of system that the business
has--either one ERP or several independent systems that may not coordinate information (Figure 1.11).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers  45

Figure 1.11 Eight Primary Components of Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP). The diagram shows the role
of ERP in streamlining a business by coordinating the various components of that business. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Businesses have been on the forefront of advancing technology. As computer systems developed throughout
the twentieth century, they brought with them the potential for many benefits, but the business world needed
to adapt and transform their infrastructure. Over the last forty years, tangible assets (buildings, machinery,
and vehicles) have declined from 80 percent of a company's value to 15 percent, while intangible assets
(trademarks, patents, and competencies) are now at an average of 85 percent of a company's value. It can be
difficult to put a value on some of the intangible assets, but it is not hard to realize they do have worth. JetBlue
has the number one brand loyalty of all North American airlines. Apple has built a kingdom around brand
loyalty. Intangible assets can give a company a competitive edge, entice consumers, and protect the
organization's brain trust.

Technological advances can directly affect managerial accounting reports, through estimates of overhead
costs. Historically, overhead was typically calculated on the basis of relatively straightforward relationships,
such as direct labor costs or direct labor hours. With the advancements through automation, in many
instances, direct labor costs are much lower and no longer relevant in computing overhead costs. Automation
is a method of using systems such as computers or robots to operate different processes and machinery to
improve efficiencies and lower direct labor costs. Companies use automation to remove the complex,
superfluous stages from a process in order to streamline the practice. In essence, labor is being traded for
machine production. Such industries as auto production are excellent examples. This exchange of direct labor
for greater costs in overhead for such factors as machinery depreciation will be addressed in Job Order
Costing and Process Costing on calculating production costs.
46                                                                                Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Automation has changed the production of automobiles over the last 100 years. This 100-second video
   from Ford Motor Company on automation (https://openstax.org/l/50Ford) demonstrates this concept.

With the growth of the Internet and the speed by which information is shared, businesses can now
communicate with employees from around the world within seconds. This has made outsourcing common in
certain sectors. Outsourcing is hiring workers outside of the company who perform their tasks inside or
outside of the country. Most of the exported jobs have gone to less-developed countries, where there are
lower labor costs. Outsourcing saves the company money on labor and overhead costs and has become a
major trend over the past several years. More and more organizations, both large and small, are now using
outsourcing as a way of growing their entities without adding additional labor and overhead costs.
Outsourcing allows a company to focus on its own competencies and hire those outside sources to handle
other duties.
Another technology that is quickly becoming widespread is radio-frequency identification (RFID). This
technology uses electromagnetic fields to routinely identify and trace inventory tags that have been attached
to objects. The tags contain information that has been stored by electronic means. The RFID tags can made
into many shapes and sizes and enclosed in many different materials. These tiny devices have advantages over
the common bar code. They do not need to be positioned precisely over the scanner and cannot be
manipulated like barcodes. This technology has been used for many years in identifying and tracking lost pets,
but it was considered too expensive for more extensive use in industry. With the advancements over the last
several years, RFID devices are now seen as "throwaway" control devices. One company recently signed a
contract to sell 500 million RFID tags at a cost of about ten cents per device. Other current uses include
antitheft tags attached to merchandise, credit card chips, and heavy-duty transponders used in shipping
containers. New uses being investigated include RFID chips in passports, food, and people.

   THINK IT THROUGH

   Outsourcing

   With the increase in global businesses and competition, there has been an increased focus on
   outsourcing in order to reduce costs. As you've learned, outsourcing involves hiring an outside company
   to provide services or products rather than having them produced internally.
   For example, you are the vice president of operations for a manufacturing firm. Other firms similar to
   yours have outsourced some of the product assembly. You estimate that you could save a significant
   amount of money on wages and benefits, as you would let go approximately ten workers if you
   outsource. Would you outsource? Why or why not?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers  47

Lean Practices

All companies want to be successful. This requires continuously trying to improve the function of the
organization. A lean business model is one in which a company strives to eliminate waste in its products,
services, and processes, while still fulfilling the company's mission. This type of model was originally
implemented by the Japanese automaker, Toyota Motor Corporation, soon after the end of World War II. The
implications of an organization adopting a lean business model can be overall business improvement, but a
lean business model can be difficult to implement because it often requires all systems and procedures that an
organization follows to be readjusted and coordinated. Managerial accounting plays a vital role in the success
and implementation of a lean business model by providing accurate cost and performance evaluation
information. Entities must comprehend the nature and sources of costs and develop systems that encapsulate
costs accurately. The better an organization is at controlling costs, the more it can improve its overall financial
performance. Continuous improvement is the manufacturing process that rejects the ideas of "good
enough." It is an ongoing effort to improve processes, products, services, and practices. This philosophy has
led organizations to adopt practices such as total quality management, just-in-time manufacturing, and Lean
Six Sigma. The fundamental ideas of all of these involve continuous improvement; they differ only in focus.

Total quality management (TQM) concentrates on quality improvement and applies this benchmark to all
aspects of business activities. In TQM, management and employees look to reveal waste and errors, streamline
the supply chain, improve customer relations, and confirm that employees are informed and properly trained.
The objective of TQM is continuous improvement by concentrating on systematic problem-solving and
customer service. Scientific methods are used to study what succeeds and what does not, and then the best
practices are implemented throughout the organization.

However, the pursuit of total quality will cost the company money. With the help of management accountants,
companies can track these costs and forecast whether or not the improvements will eventually save the
organization money down the road.

Just-in-time (JIT) manufacturing is an inventory system that companies use to increase efficiency and
decrease waste by receiving goods only as they are needed within the production process, thereby reducing
warehousing costs. This method requires accurate forecasting. Managerial accountants work together with
purchasing and production schedulers in keeping the flow of materials accurate and efficient.

This method was initiated by Toyota Motor Corporation, and it has expanded to many other manufacturing
organizations throughout the world. Toyota set the example by controlling their inventory levels by relying on
their supply chain to deliver the raw materials it needed to build their cars. The parts arrived just as they were
needed, not before or after.

One major advantage of JIT manufacturing is reducing costs by eradicating warehouse storage needs.
Organizations, in turn, tend to spend less money on raw materials because of a reduction in spoilage and
waste. Another advantage is that companies can easily move from the assembly of one product to the
assembly of another.

Disadvantages of JIT manufacturing start with its complexity. In moving from a traditional manufacturing
approach to a JIT approach, management must reconfigure the entire flow of the production process, from the
initial use of the raw materials to the output of the final finished good. Another disadvantage of JIT
manufacturing is that it makes organizations more susceptible to disruptions in the supply chain. If a supplier
of raw materials has a labor strike, weather problems, a breakdown of machinery, or some other catastrophe
and cannot deliver the materials on time, that one supplier can shut down an entire production process and
delay delivery of finished goods. An example of this occurred in 2011 after a tsunami and earthquake hit Japan
48                                                                                Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers

and disrupted production at a critical supplier of auto parts. General Motors (GM) facilities in the United States
announced they would have to shut down assembly plants where they could not continue production without
the parts from Japan.

Lean Six Sigma (LSS) is a quality control program that depends on a combined effort of many team members
to enhance performance by analytically removing waste and diminishing variations between products. The
lean component of LSS is the concept that anything that is not needed in a product or service, or any
unnecessary steps that exist, add cost to the product or service and therefore should be considered waste and
eliminated. The Six Sigma component of LSS has to do with the elimination of defects. Essentially, as a
company becomes leaner, it should also be able to reduce defects in manufacturing or in providing a service.
Fewer defects add to cost savings through the need for fewer reworked products, fewer repeat service calls,
and therefore, more satisfied customers. It was developed by Motorola in 1986 and emphasized cycle-time
improvement and the reduction of defects. This process has shown to be a powerful way of improving
business efficiency and effectiveness. As organizations continue to modify and update their processes for
optimal productivity, they must be flexible. As of 2017, LSS had developed into a business management way of
thinking that focused on customer needs, customer retention, and improvement of business products and
services. There are many establishments, including Motorola, that now do LSS training. There are certifications
including white belt, yellow belt, green belt, black belt, and master black belt. The belts signify an employee's
knowledge regarding LSS. For example, a white belt understands the terminology, structure, and idea of LSS
and reports issues to green or black belts. A green belt typically manages LSS projects, and a master black belt
works with upper-level management to find the areas in the business where LSS needs to be implemented,
leads several LSS teams, and oversees implementation of those projects.

Kaizen (Japanese for change for the better) is another process that is often linked to Six Sigma (Figure 1.12).
The two concepts are often used together for process improvements, as they both are designed for
continuous improvement by eliminating waste and increasing efficiencies. The concept of kaizen comes from
an ancient Japanese philosophy that involves continuously working toward perfection in all areas of one's life.
It was adopted in the business world after World War II in an effort to rebuild Japan. It centers on making
small, day-to-day changes that develop into major improvements over time. The key behind the success of
kaizen comes from requiring all employees--from the CEO at the top, all the way down to the shop-floor
janitors--to participate by making recommendations to improve the organization. From the start of the
process, it must be well defined that all recommendations are appreciated and that there will be no adverse
results for participating. Workers, instead, should be rewarded for any modifications that advance the
workplace. Employees become more self-assured and invested when they help improve the company.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers                                                                   49

Figure 1.12 Kaizen Board Showing Kaizen Process and Some Related Tactics. (credit left: modification of
"Woman Standing in Front of Sitting People" by "rawpixel.com"/Pexels, Pexels license / Public Domain; right:
modification of "A few kaizen tactics" by Sacha Chua/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Another lean practice, the theory of constraints (TOC), involves recognizing and removing bottlenecks within
the value chain that may be limiting an organization's profitability. This philosophy, developed by Dr. Eliyahu
M. Goldratt, is a valuable instrument for improving the flaws in processes. The main goal of this methodology
is to remove obstructions, or constraints, which are referred to as "bottlenecks." There are several types of
bottlenecks that organizations must deal with endlessly. One example occurs at the grocery store when it is
crowded and there are only three checkout lanes open but ten people in each line. Obviously, the bottleneck is
created by having too few checkout lanes open. The bottleneck can be mitigated by opening more checkout
lanes. Other examples are listed in Table 1.5.

   Bottleneck                              Examples of Constraints
Physical                                                             Examples
Policy
Culture        Employee resources, limited space, equipment resources
Market         Procedures, regulations, contracts
               "It's the way we've always done it"
               Size of the market, demand for product, nature of competition

Table 1.5

There are five steps in the cycle of continuous improvement under TOC:

 1. Identify the system constraint.
 2. Decide how best to exploit the constraint and make quick changes using existing resources.
 3. Subordinate everything else to the process to ensure alignment with and support of the needs of the

      constraint.
 4. Elevate the system's constraint, and determine if the constraint has shifted to another area in the process.
 5. Repeat the process.

This is a continuous cycle; therefore, once a bottleneck is solved, the next bottleneck should be addressed
immediately (Figure 1.13).
50  Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers

Figure 1.13 Five Focusing Steps of the Theory of Constraints in Its Cyclical Process. (attribution: Copyright
Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Balanced Scorecard

The balanced scorecard (BSC) approach uses both financial and nonfinancial measures in evaluating all
attributes of the organization's procedures. This approach differs from the traditional approach of only using
financial measures to evaluate a company. While financial measures are essential, they are only a portion of
what needs to be evaluated. The balanced scorecard focuses on both high-level and low-level measures, using
the company's own strategic plan. This method assesses the organization in four separate perspectives:

  · Financial. The financial measures are the major focus of the BSC--but not the only measures. This
      perspective asks questions like whether the organization is making money or whether the stockholders
      are pleased.

  · Customer. The BSC also evaluates how the organization is perceived, from the customer's perspective.
      This measures customer satisfaction, new customer growth, and market share.

  · Internal process. The internal procedures and processes perspective observes how smoothly things are
      running. This perspective will examine quality, efficiency, and waste as they relate directly to the products
      or services.

  · Learning and growth/capacity. This area evaluates the entity and its performance from the standpoint of
      human capital, infrastructure, culture, technology, and other areas. Are employees collaborating and
      sharing information? Does everyone have access to the latest trends in training and continuing education
      in their areas?

The main advantage of this approach is that it offers organizations a way to see the cause-and-effect in the
objectives. For example, if an organization would like to make more money in order to pay higher dividends to
its stockholders, the organization will need to increase market share, improve customer satisfaction, or grow
its customer base. In order to make customers happier or gain new customers, the organization could try to
reduce defects and increase overall quality of the products; to accomplish that, the organization could retrain
or offer new training to its employees.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers                                                                51

Globalization

The development of business through international influence or extending social and cultural aspects around
the world is known as globalization. It has expanded our competitive borders, giving customers more
alternatives. Customers can order an item from another country with the click of a button and have that item
delivered in a few days or less. How has globalization affected companies? Not only must they choose between
ordering goods or components globally, but they must decide in which countries to sell their goods, and in
which companies they may be able to establish factories.

Globalization affects management accountants in several ways. Companies need real-time, accurate
information to make good decisions, so more timely and accurate information is needed. As companies
expand globally, managers need to know the cost of operating internationally, as well as the laws, rules, and
customs. Globalization also can expose companies to improvements in running a business.

Debates continue as to the positive and negative consequences of globalization in all of its contexts. The
advantages of globalization include helping developing countries in creating jobs, developing industries,
differentiating and expanding their markets, and bettering their standard of living for their citizens. Some
believe the expansion of pop culture around the globe to be an advantage of cultural globalization. It has
multiplied the interchange of ideas, music, art, language, and cultural ideals. On the other side of the debate,
one common criticism of globalization is that it has enhanced wealth disparity and, further, that organizations
of the Western world have benefited much more than those anywhere else. There is also the argument that
globalization is improving standards of living worldwide as industrialization is expanding, but it is causing
global warming and climate change, due to the greenhouse gases the factories emit. Additionally, in some
areas it has led to the abuse and misuse of natural resources and caused other detrimental consequences.

How do these various globalization debates affect businesses? A successful company must be profitable to
stay in business, but profitability is not the single key to success. A successful company must also consider the
environment in which it operates--culturally, socially, environmentally, and economically--which requires
companies to evolve and adjust as each of these environments changes. This evolution means that companies
must continually evaluate themselves and their impact on all of their stakeholders, which include investors,
creditors, management, employees, customers, governments, and, either directly or indirectly, the world. What
companies used as measures of success forty years ago are different from the measures used twenty years
ago, and those are different from those that are used today and still different from what will be needed in the
future. Management accounting is the area in which many of these changing measures are either generated
or evaluated. Such measures not only evaluate the cost effectiveness of products or services, but determine
the best way to evaluate and reward employees and evaluate the cost-benefit of environmental protections,
the impact of automation versus outsourcing, and the cost of training and educating employees.

ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

Global Ethics

In an article in Business 2 Community, Kate Gerasimova draws on her experience within the Russian and
American business environments to discuss the role of ethics in global business endeavors. Ethics are the
principles, and the values that underlie them, that allow us to determine what is right and wrong.
According to Gerasimova, ethics fall into three categories: "code and compliance, destiny and values, and
52  Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers

    social outreach."[8] In the global business context, she also emphasizes the importance of respecting
    differences in values held by coworkers, communicating honestly in business dealings, and building
    trust. To assist in the application of the organization's ethical approach to doing business in a different
    culture, it needs to develop a set of "core values as the basis for global policies and decision-making."[9]
    Gerasimova notes that organizations also need to consider that "clients and coworkers may have a
    different perspective on ethics and proper behavior than those to which you are accustomed." To
    address the different perspectives, an organization should train its employees to be culturally sensitive
    while balancing the need for rules and policies with the ability for employees to be flexible and to use
    their imagination.

Social Responsibility and Sustainability

What is sustainability, and what does it have to do with businesses? The United Nations definition is "the
ability to meet the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their
own needs."[10] Usually, sustainability is viewed as having three components: economic, social, and
environmental. Obviously, a business cannot continue into the future unless it is economically sound; however,
if it maintains its economic status by depleting too many natural resources or paying illegal wages, then that
company is not practicing good social responsibility.

Corporate social responsibility (CSR) is an organization's programs that evaluate and take responsibility for
the organization's effects on environmental and social welfare. There are many aspects of corporate social
responsibility, including the types, locations, and wages of the labor employed; the ways in which renewable
and nonrenewable resources are utilized; how charitable organizations or local areas in which the company
operates are helped; and setting corporate employee policies such as maternity and paternity leave that
promote family well-being. Although the causes and cures of climate change are open to discussion, most will
agree that everyone, including corporations, should do their part to avoid further damage and improve any
negative impact on the environment.

   CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

   Corporate Social Responsibility at New Belgium Brewing

   As New Belgium Brewing Company states on their website: "We're New Belgium and we pollute. There.
   We said it. We are not perfect and we know it." But New Belgium Brewing has become a leader in
   sustainability. They preach it in every aspect of the company: production, marketing, employees, and
   customers. The company makes the point that being energy efficient is not only being environmentally
   responsible, it is being financially responsible through their "internal energy efficiency tax." The
   company uses many different metrics to track and improve its impact on the environment. For example,

8 Kate Gerasimova. "The Critical Role of Ethics and Culture in Business Globalization." Business to Community. September 29, 2016.
https://www.business2community.com/strategy/critical-role-ethics-culture-business-globalization-01667737
9 Kate Gerasimova. "The Critical Role of Ethics and Culture in Business Globalization." Business to Community. September 29, 2016.
https://www.business2community.com/strategy/critical-role-ethics-culture-business-globalization-01667737
10 "Sustainable Development." General Assembly of the United Nations. http://www.un.org/en/ga/president/65/issues/sustdev.shtml

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers                                                           53

the company measures its energy usage and taxes itself on energy consumption and then saves those
internal tax dollars to implement further energy savings by installing new processes and techniques.
They divert 99.9 percent of the waste from their brewery away from landfills. The company makes
enough in recycling revenues to pay four salaries. These are just a few ways in which New Belgium
Brewing faces the challenges of social responsibility. Read more at http://www.newbelgium.com/
Sustainability/Environmental-Metrics.

In late 2016, the Paris Agreement (Paris Accord) brought together nations for the common cause of
combatting climate change. There were 197 nations in attendance, and until recently, all 197 ratified or agreed
to the effort. It requires all partners to pursue specific endeavors to keep the global temperature rise to 2
degrees Celsius above that of preindustrial levels. This would be accomplished by voluntarily reducing
greenhouse gas emissions. In early 2017, US President Donald Trump announced that the United States would
withdraw from the agreement. At that time, only Syria and Nicaragua were holdouts. Since then, both have
signed the agreement, leaving the United States now as the lone holdout, although it will take several years for
the formal withdrawal. In spite of the president's announcement, there have been representatives from cities,
states, corporations, and universities around the United States that have pledged to continue with the
agreement and meet the greenhouse gas emission targets as set out in the Paris Accord. Many of the
corporations who have promised to move forward with reducing greenhouse gases have expressed that the
Paris Accord expands markets for groundbreaking clean technologies and that it creates employment
opportunities alongside economic growth.

In terms of managerial accounting, sustainable business practices create many issues. Organizations need to
decide what elements will be measured. For example, minimizing electricity consumption, maximizing
employee safety, or reducing greenhouse gases may be the biggest issue of concern for a company. Then, the
company needs to determine ways of measurement that make sense regarding those items. Companies are
becoming more aware of their impact on the world, and many are creating social responsibility reports in
addition to their annual reports. This type of reporting requires different types of information and analysis
than the typical financial measures gathered by companies. This is sometimes referred to as the triple bottom
line, as it assesses an organization's performance not only relating to the profit, but also relating to the world
and its people, and will be covered in Sustainability Reporting.

   YOUR TURN

   Zaley's Machining Division

   Zaley is an aerospace manufacturing firm in the southwest United States. They manufacture several
   products used in the aviation and aerospace industry. The company has been steadily growing over the
   past ten years in both sales and personnel. The engineering and design team uses computerized aided
   drafting (CAD) to design the various products that are produced by the machining division.

   The machining division recently implemented significant technological improvements by installing an
   advanced technique using hard-metal and aluminum high-speed machining. The following managers are
   involved with the machining division:
54                                                                                Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers

      · Alex Freedman, technical specialist (supervises all computer programs)
      · Emma Vlovski, sales manager (supervises all sales agents)
      · Kayla McClaughley, cost accounting director (supervises all cost accountants)
      · Mwangi Kori, lead test engineer (oversees all new-product testing and design)
      · Torek Sanchez, production director (supervises all manufacturing employees)

    Each of these managers needs information to make decisions needed to carry out the respective jobs.

    Think about what might be involved in the job of each of these managers and the types of decisions they
    may be required to make in order to meet the goals of the company. What information would be needed
    by each of the managers?

    Solution

    Answers will vary. Sample answer:

      · Alex Freeman, technical specialist (supervises all computer programs), needs information on the
          hours and type of usage possibly by department or by individual to ascertain if the equipment is
          being used effectively or if the programs used by the company are appropriate or additions or
          deletions need to be made. In addition, this information is needed to address how much and what
          type of staffing he needs in his department.

      · Emma Vlovski, sales manager (supervises all sales agents), would want information about the level
          and type of sales for the company as a whole as well as for the individual sales agents. She would
          want to know which products are selling well, which ones are not, which sales agents are being the
          most successful, and why they are more successful than the others. Emma would also want
          information on how the agents are compensated, as this may be tied to the sales agent's efforts to
          meet sales goals.

      · Kayla McClaughley, cost accounting director (supervises all cost accountants), would want to know
          what tasks the cost accountants perform, how much time they spend on these tasks, and whether
          there are any redundancies in workload so that improvements in efficiency can be made. If any of
          the accountants has certifications such as CPA or CMA, she would want to know if they are keeping
          their certifications current through continuing professional education.

      · Mwangi Kori, lead test engineer (oversees all new-product testing and design), would need
          information on the efficiency and effectiveness of each of the products tested, including success and
          failure rates. She would want information on how well the policies and procedures for design
          changes are being followed and if those policies and procedures need updating or rewriting.

      · Thomas Sanchez, production director (supervises all manufacturing employees), would want
          information on hours worked, pay rates, and training (past and ongoing) for the manufacturing
          employees. She would also want information on how each individual employee performs his or her
          role in the manufacturing environment. For example, are there particular employees who have
          fewer defects or down time in their part of the process than others?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers  55

     Key Terms

automation method of using systems such as computers or robots to operate different processes, and
     machinery to improve efficiencies and lower direct labor costs

balanced scorecard tool used to evaluate performance using qualitative and nonqualitative measures
board of directors group of individuals elected by the shareholders of a company with the role of placing

     management, supervising management, and making key decisions on major issues of the company
bribery when an organization or representative of an organization gives money or other financial benefits to

     another individual, business, or official in order to gain favor or to manipulate a business decision
budget analyst someone who arranges and manages the master budget and compares master budget

     projections to actual results
cash-management accountant someone with responsibilities that include transferring monies between

     accounts, monitoring deposits and payments, reconciling cash balances, creating and tracking cash
     forecasts, and performing all other cash-related financial processes
Certified Financial Analyst (CFA) certification for a career in the finance and investment domains;
     requirements include a bachelor's degree or four years' experience and passing all three sections of the
     exam
Certified Fraud Examiner (CFE) signifies proven proficiency in fraud prevention, detection, and deterrence;
     requirements include bachelor's degree, two years of work-related experience, moral character
     references, and passing of four separate exams
Certified Government Auditing Professional (CGAP) designation exclusively for auditors employed
     throughout the public sector (federal, state, local); requirements are the same as for the CIA, but with a
     different exam
Certified Internal Auditor (CIA) credential offered by the Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA) and one of the
     only certifications accepted worldwide; requirements include a bachelor's degree, two years of work
     experience in a related field, and passing the three sections of the examination
Certified Management Accountant (CMA) certification for a specialist in corporate accounting
     management, including financial analytics, budgeting, and strategic assessment; requires a bachelor's
     degree, two years of work experience, and successfully passing both parts of the exam
Certified Public Accountant (CPA) top tier in accounting certifications; in the United States, each state has
     different educational and experience requirements, and certification requires passing the four-part CPA
     administered by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA)
chief executive officer (CEO) executive within a company with the highest ranking title who has the overall
     responsibility for the management of a company; reports to the board of directors
chief financial officer (CFO) corporation officer who reports to the CEO and oversees all of the accounting
     and finance concerns of a company
collaboration working in cross-functional teams and earning the trust and respect of colleagues in order to
     complete a task
commercial awareness knowing how a business is run and how it is influenced by the external
     environment, and knowing and understanding the overall industry within which the business is operating
continuous improvement ongoing effort to improve processes, products, services, and practices
controller financial officer of a corporation reporting to the CFO who is responsible for an organization's
     accounting records, financial statements, tax returns, and internal reporting
controlling monitoring of the planning objectives that were put into place
corporate social responsibility (CSR) actions that firms take to assume responsibility for their impact on the
56  Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers

     environment and social well-being
cost accountant employee who amasses large sums of data, checking for accuracy and then formulating the

     cost of raw materials, work in process, finished goods, labor, overhead, and other associated
     manufacturing costs
effective communication conveying information in both written and oral forms in a way that the intended
     audience can understand
Enrolled Agent (EA) credential focusing on a career in taxation; created by the IRS to signify significant
     knowledge of the US tax code and the ability to apply the concepts of that code
enterprise resource planning (ERP) system that helps a company streamline its operations and helps
     management respond quickly to change
evaluating comparing actual results against the planned results
external user someone who relies on the financial statements and annual reports to access information
     about a company in order to make more informed decisions (e.g., creditor, tax authority and regulator,
     investor, customer, competitor, and others)
Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) independent, nonprofit organization that sets financial
     accounting and reporting standards for both public and private sector businesses in the United States
     that use Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP)
financial analyst someone who assists in preparing budgets and tracking actual costs, and performs other
     tasks that support other management personnel in organizing forecasts and projections
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA) law that specifically prohibits payments to foreign government
     officials to aid in attaining or retaining business and requires a company to have good internal controls so
     a slush fund to pay bribes cannot be created and maintained
generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) common set of rules, standards, and procedures that
     publicly traded companies must follow when composing their financial statements
globalization development of business through international influence, or extending social and cultural
     aspects around the world
goal what a company expects to accomplish over time
government agency found at all levels of government: federal, state, county, city, and so on; includes
     military, law enforcement, airports, and school systems
Institute of Management Accountants (IMA) professional organization for management accountants that
     provides research, education, a means of knowledge sharing, and practice development to its members
intangible good good with financial value but no physical presence; examples include copyrights, patents,
     goodwill, and trademarks
internal auditor employee of an organization whose job is to provide an independent and objective
     evaluation of the company's accounting and operational activities
internal user someone inside the company or organization who is responsible for managing the company's
     business interests and executing decisions (e.g., all levels of management, owner, and other employees)
just-in-time (JIT) manufacturing inventory system that companies use to increase efficiency and decrease
     waste by receiving goods only as they are needed within the production process, thereby reducing
     warehousing costs
kaizen another process that is often linked to Six Sigma and is designed for continuous improvement by
     eliminating waste and increasing efficiencies; a Japanese word meaning change for the better
lean business model one in which a company strives to eliminate waste in its products, services, and
     processes, while still fulfilling the company's mission
Lean Six Sigma (LSS) quality control program that depends on a combined effort of many team members to
     enhance performance by analytically removing waste and diminishing variations between products
managerial accounting process that allows decision makers to set and evaluate business goals by

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers  57

     determining what information they need to make a particular decision and how to analyze and
     communicate this information
mission statement short statement of a company's purpose and focus
monetary accounting information relating to money or currency
nonmonetary accounting information not relating to money or currency, such as the quantity of materials,
     number of employees, number of hours worked, and so forth
nonprofit (not-for-profit) organization tax-exempt organization that serves its community in a variety of
     areas
objective target that needs to be met in order to meet company goals
outsourcing act of using another company to provide goods or services that your company requires
planning process of setting goals and objectives
radio-frequency identification (RFID) technology that uses electromagnetic fields to routinely identify and
     trace inventory tags that have been attached to objects
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) federal law that regulates business practices; intended to protect investors by
     enhancing the accuracy and reliability of corporate financial statements and disclosures through
     governance guidelines including sanctions for criminal conduct
strategic planning setting priorities and determining how to allocate corporate resources to help an
     organization accomplish short-term and long-term goals
sustainability meeting the needs of the present generation without compromising the ability of future
     generations to meet their own needs by being aware of current economic, social, and environmental
     impacts
tangible good physical good that customers can handle and see
theory of constraints (TOC) process of recognizing and removing bottlenecks within the value chain that
     may be limiting an organization's profitability
total quality management (TQM) process in which management and employees look to reveal waste and
     errors, streamline the supply chain, improve customer relations, and confirm that employees are
     informed and properly trained
treasurer financial officer of a corporation reporting to the CFO who is in control of the finance side of the
     business (cash position, corporation funds)
whistleblower someone who provides evidence of fraud

     Summary

1.1 Define Managerial Accounting and Identify the Three Primary Responsibilities of Management
  · The purpose of managerial accounting is to supply financial and nonfinancial information to the
      organization's management and other internal decision makers.
  · Most of the job responsibilities of a manager fit into one of three categories: planning, controlling, and
      evaluating.
  · Planning involves setting goals and forming the plans to achieve those goals.
  · Controlling involves the day-to-day activities. Its purpose is to help in planning functions and to facilitate
      coordination within the organization.
  · Evaluation determines whether plans are being followed and whether progress is being made as planned
      toward the fulfillment of organizational goals and objectives. It also involves taking corrective measures in
      case of deviations identified in the course of action.

1.2 Distinguish between Financial and Managerial Accounting
58                                                                                Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers

  · Managerial accounting provides information to managers and other users within the company. It has a
      specific focus, and the information is detailed and timely.

  · Financial accounting follows the guidelines of the GAAP, set in place by the FASB and, in many cases, by
      the SEC. Managerial accounting is much more flexible and does not have to follow specific rules or
      guidelines.

  · There are seven key differences between managerial accounting and financial accounting: users, types of
      reports produced, frequency of producing the reports, purpose of the information produced, focus of the
      reporting information, nature of the original information used to produce the reports, and verification of
      the data used to create the reports.

1.3 Explain the Primary Roles and Skills Required of Managerial Accountants
  · Essential skills for managerial accountants include commercial awareness, collaboration, effective
      communication skills, strong technology talents, extensive analytical abilities, and elevated ethical values.
  · Management accountants work with individuals at all levels of an organization from the CEO to the shop
      floor workers.
  · There are many different career paths management accountants can take to work in corporations,
      government entities, service firms, or nonprofit organizations.
  · There are numerous certifications that accountants can earn to improve their careers and set themselves
      apart from their peers.

1.4 Describe the Role of the Institute of Management Accountants and the Use of Ethical Standards
  · Many professional organizations share resources, such as education, research, and practice development,
      with their members. They also enforce a code of ethics for their members.
  · All employees within a company are expected to act ethically within their business actions. This can
      sometimes be difficult when the company almost promotes the idea of unethical actions.
  · In response to several corporate scandals, the United States Congress passed the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of
      2002 (SOX).
  · Ethical codes can be helpful guidelines, but the rationale to act ethically must originate from within
      oneself, from personal morals and values. There are steps that provide an outline for examining ethical
      issues.
  · One of the issues with ethics is that what one person, community, or even country considers unethical or
      wrong, another person, community, or country may have no problem with and see it as just a way of
      doing business.
  · The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977 specifically prohibits payments to foreign government officials
      to aid in attaining or retaining business. This provision applies to all US persons and foreign firms acting
      within the United States.

1.5 Describe Trends in Today's Business Environment and Analyze Their Impact on Accounting
  · Business regulations are always being altered, global competition continues to increase, and technology
      provides continual disruption. Management accounting must keep up with the changes in the business
      environment.
  · The fundamental difference between manufacturing organizations and service-based firms is whether the
      organizations produce a tangible product.
  · Business entities have been in the lead for using technology, but they must continue to adjust quickly
      with the ever-advancing business technology.
  · ERP systems help companies streamline their operations and help management respond quickly to
      change.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers                                                                 59

· Lean manufacturing, which was started in Japan by automakers, is now a widely used practice that
   attempts to increase productivity and eliminate waste.

· The philosophy of continuous improvement has led organizations to adopt practices such as TQM, JIT
   manufacturing, and LSS.

· The balanced scorecard approach uses both financial and nonfinancial measures in evaluating all
   attributes of the organization's procedures.

· Globalization has expanded competitive borders, giving customers and companies more alternatives.
· Many companies have started to assess their corporation not only on financial profits, but also on their

   corporate social responsibility.

     Multiple Choice

1. 1.1 The managers of an organization are responsible for performing several broad functions. They are
________.

    A. planning, controlling, and selling
    B. directing, controlling, and evaluating
    C. planning, evaluating, and manufacturing
    D. planning, controlling, and evaluating

2. 1.1 Management accountants help the management of an organization in their planning function
through ________.

    A. monitoring anti-theft systems
    B. strategic planning
    C. evaluating costs
    D. analyzing profits

3. 1.1 Which of the following is a primary aspect of the evaluating function within an organization?
    A. comparing actual results against expected results for products, departments, divisions, or the company
          as a whole
    B. reviewing only the quantitative or financial results of the company
    C. setting goals
    D. putting controls in place for the upcoming year

4. 1.1 During the control function, the measurements taken of the performance must be accurate enough
to see ________.

    A. only positive results
    B. deviations and variances
    C. the primary focus
    D. only the negative results

5. 1.1 Which of the following is false regarding strategic planning?
    A. It is the sole responsibility of supervisors.
    B. It will span many years.
    C. It should include both short-term and long-term goals.
    D. Strategic objectives will be diverse and vary from company to company.
60                                                                                Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers

6. 1.2 Managerial accounting produces information:
    A. to meet the needs of external users
    B. that is often focused on the future
    C. to meet the needs of investors
    D. that follows the rules of GAAP

7. 1.2 Management accounting:
    A. emphasizes special-purpose information
    B. relates to the company as a whole
    C. is limited to strictly cost figures
    D. is controlled by GAAP

8. 1.2 Internal users of accounting information would not include ________.
    A. managers
    B. employees
    C. creditors
    D. officers

9. 1.2 External users of accounting information would include ________.
    A. employees
    B. managers
    C. investors
    D. supervisors

10.     1.2 Which of the following statements is incorrect?
    A.  The practice of management accounting is fairly flexible.
    B.  The information gathered from management accounting is not required by law.
    C.  Management accounting focuses mainly on the internal user.
    D.  Reports produced using management accounting must follow GAAP.

11.     1.3 The stockholders of a company are:
    A.  the owners
    B.  policy setters
    C.  responsible and liable for the financial well-being of the company
    D.  operating within the company as independent shareholders

12.     1.3 The controller of a corporation:
    A.  reports to the CFO and is in charge of the finance side of the business
    B.  reports to the CFO and is in charge of the accounting side of the business
    C.  reports to the CEO and implements all cash policies
    D.  reports to the board of directors

13.     1.3 The Certified Financial Analyst (CFA) certification:
    A.  only requires a high school diploma
    B.  is administered by the AICPA
    C.  consists of three separate exams that must be taken in succession
    D.  is the most popular certification among accountants in the United States

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers                                                                 61

14.     1.3 The Certified Management Accountant (CMA) certification:
    A.  signifies someone specializing in tax accounting
    B.  requires an associate's degree and four years of work experience
    C.  includes a two-part exam, education requirements, and a work experience requirement
    D.  is offered to managers who take special courses in accounting

15. 1.3 Which of the following terms means the ability to work in cross-functional teams in order to
complete a task?

    A. supervisory skills
    B. conceptualization
    C. collaboration
    D. resource planning

16. 1.3 Which of the following terms means knowing how a business is run and how it is influenced by
external forces, and knowing and understanding the overall industry?

    A. commercial awareness
    B. conceptualization
    C. collaboration
    D. imagination

17.     1.4 What is the law that protects investors from fraudulent financial accounting activity?
    A.  FASB
    B.  SACS
    C.  SOX
    D.  CPAS

18.     1.4 What year was the Sarbanes-Oxley Act enacted?
    A.  2007
    B.  1992
    C.  1997
    D.  2002

19. 1.4 When a representative of an organization gives money to another business official in order to gain
favor and/or manipulate a business decision, this is known as ________.

    A. whistleblowing
    B. bribery
    C. buyer debits
    D. face value

20. 1.4 The law that specifically prohibits payments to foreign officials in order to attain business is knowns
as ________.

    A. FCPA
    B. AICPA
    C. SOX
    D. IFRS
62                                                                                Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers

21.     1.4 Which of the following is not a step in the outline for examining ethical issues?
    A.  Establish the facts of the situation.
    B.  Evaluate each course of action.
    C.  Make a decision.
    D.  Confirm decision with FASB.

22.     1.5 Which of the following is not an objective used in the balanced scorecard approach?
    A.  Customer
    B.  Financial
    C.  Vendor
    D.  Learning and growth

23.     1.5 Which of the following is not true regarding continuous improvement?
    A.  It applies to both service and manufacturing companies.
    B.  It is used to reduce performance costs.
    C.  It rejects the idea of "good enough."
    D.  It can be applied only to improve processes and products but not services and practices.

24. 1.5 A company's attempts to utilize sustainable business practices with regard to its employees, the
environment, and society are known as ________.

    A. a balanced scorecard
    B. corporate social responsibility
    C. total quality management
    D. value chain

25. 1.5 A process that is often linked to Six Sigma and is designed toward continuous improvement by
eliminating waste is ________.

    A. kamikaze
    B. value chain
    C. total quality management
    D. kaizen

26.     1.5 An inventory system that organizations use to increase efficiency and decrease waste is ________.
    A.  corporate social responsibility
    B.  just-in-time manufacturing
    C.  total quality management
    D.  Lean Six Sigma

27. 1.5 A quality control program that depends on multiple team members for removing waste and
diminishing defects within products is ________.

    A. kaizen
    B. total quality management
    C. Lean Six Sigma
    D. a balanced scorecard

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers  63

     Questions

1. 1.1 Carlita believes an important part of the planning process for managers is being sure to position the
company to achieve its goals. She thinks that positioning is an extensive concept and can depend on the right
information and that managerial accountants assist in positioning the company. Is she correct? Explain.

2. 1.1 What are some activities and tasks a manager might perform when engaging in the controlling
function of management responsibilities?

3. 1.1 If there are deviations from the stated goals and objectives, what steps can managers take to get
back on track? Provide at least two specific examples.

4. 1.1 Explain how managerial accountants help managers plan, control, and evaluate.

5. 1.1 How do the subject matter of reports and the verification of reports differ between financial
accounting and managerial accounting?

6. 1.2 What is the purpose of management accounting?

7. 1.2 Who are the primary users of the information gathered by managerial accountants?

8. 1.2 What are the key differences between financial accounting and managerial accounting?

9. 1.3 Other than accounting skills, what six qualities must be prevalent in a managerial accountant?

10. 1.3 Explain how having more than one of the accounting credentials would be beneficial to an
accounting career.

11. 1.3 Briefly discuss the chain of command for someone being hired into an organization as a staff
managerial accountant.

12. 1.3 According to the information available at http://www.accounting.com/careers/, what are six
different areas of accounting on which you can focus your career?

13. 1.3 According to the information on management accounting available at http://www.accounting.com/
careers/, what are some areas of specialization?

14. 1.3 Go to http://www.accounting.com/careers/ and look up your state to find projected job growth and
projected salaries.

15. 1.4 What other professional business organizations have a code of ethics?

16. 1.4 How can having a bonus system based purely on sales goals create an environment that
encourages unethical behavior?

17. 1.4 What led to the United States Congress passing the public accounting reform act called Sarbanes-
Oxley?

18. 1.5 What is an enterprise resource planning (ERP) system? What are the principal benefits of such a
system?

19. 1.5 Describe what is meant by the term "balanced" in the term balanced scorecard method.

20. 1.5 What is corporate social responsibility, and who are the stakeholders?
64                                                                                Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers

        Exercise Set A

EA1.     1.2 Indicate whether each statement describes financial accounting or managerial accounting.
    A.  The information is directed at external users who are making decisions pertaining to investing,
        extending credit, and other decisions.
    B.  The principal users are the organization's managers.
    C.  The key focus is on the entity as a whole.
    D.  The rules and principles are very flexible.
    E.  The information gathered is usually available after an independent audit has been completed.

EA2.     1.2 Identify the following as True or False:
    A.  Managerial accounting reports must comply with the rules set in place by the FASB.
    B.  Financial accounting reports are typically general-purpose reports.
    C.  Financial accounting reports pertain to the entity as a whole, whereas managerial accounting focuses
        more on subunits of the organization.
    D.  The main users of the financial accounting information are the internal users.
    E.  Managerial reports are prepared on an as-needed basis.
    F.  Financial accounting reports often must be audited at least annually by an independent auditor.

EA3.     1.2 Define each of these users of accounting information as an internal user of external user:
    A.  Management
    B.  Employees
    C.  Investors
    D.  Creditors
    E.  Customers
    F.  Tax authorities

EA4.     1.2 Discuss what information would be most useful for these users of accounting information:
    A.  Management
    B.  Employees
    C.  Investors
    D.  Creditors
    E.  Customers
    F.  Tax authorities

EA5. 1.3 Taylor Speedy has prepared the following list of statements about managerial accounting, financial
accounting, and the functions of management. Identify each statement as true or false.

    A. Financial accounting centers on providing information to internal users.
    B. Staff positions are directly involved in the company's primary revenue-generating activities.
    C. Preparation of budgets is part of financial accounting.
    D. Managerial accounting applies only to merchandising and manufacturing companies.
    E. Both managerial accounting and financial accounting deal with many of the same economic events.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers                                                                    65

EA6. 1.3 Match the term with the description:

A. Certified Public      i. Specialist in corporate accounting management; favors financial analytics,
Accountant               budgeting, and strategic domains
                         ii. Considered the top tier in accounting certifications; must pass a four-part
B. Certified Financial   exam, with education and work experience requirements
Analyst                  iii. Designation that is exclusively for auditors of the public sector

C. Certified Management  iv. Credential for auditors who work within organizations and is one of a few
Accountant               that is accepted worldwide
                         v. Certification for those with a career in finance and investment areas
D. Certified Internal
Auditor                  vi. Designation that proves proficiency in fraud prevention, detection, and
                         deterrence
E. Certified Fraud
Examiner

F. Certified Government
Auditing Professional

EA7. 1.4 After the passage of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act in 2002, many new responsibilities were put into place
for organizations and their management. What are the four significant issues that were addressed by the act
and its provisions as presented in this chapter? How does the act and its various requirements help deter
fraudulent activity?

EA8.     1.4 Indicate whether each of the following statements is true or false.
    A.  Bribery in the world of business typically happens when an organization or representative of an
        organization gives financial benefits to an official to gain favor or manipulate a business decision.
    B.  The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act was implemented in the aftermath of disclosures that businesses
        were violating the IMA Code of Ethics.
    C.  Managers are required to follow specific rules issued by the IMA for internal financial reporting.
    D.  Ethics is more than obeying laws.
    E.  The Sarbanes-Oxley Act addressed public company accounting reform.

EA9. 1.5 Match each lean business method to the best description:

A. Just-in-time          i. The focus is on quality throughout the entire process.
manufacturing
                         ii. Inventory is attained or produced only as needed.
B. Continuous
improvements             iii. A combined effort of team members is used to eliminate waste and
                         defects.
C. Total quality         iv. All managers and employees are always looking for ways to improve
management               operations.

D. Lean Six Sigma
66                                                                                Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers

EA10. 1.5 For each of the activities listed, choose the manufacturing concept that applies: (i) just-in-time
inventory, (ii) continuous improvement, or (iii) total quality management.

    A. A company receives inventory daily based on customer orders.
    B. Manufacturing factories have been arranged in such a fashion to reduce inefficiencies.
    C. Companies organize customer focus groups in order to look at customer needs and expectations.
    D. The entire production process is standardized and written down with procedures.
    E. Each customer receives a survey of satisfaction with their product.
    F. All orders are complete and shipped within three business days.

EA11.     1.5 Look up the definitions for the following terms:
    A.  Budget (Budgeting)
    B.  Capital budget (Capital Budgeting Decisions)
    C.  Balanced scorecard (Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures)
    D.  Break-Even point (Cost Volume Profit Analysis)

Provide examples of how each of these terms is used in your own life and how using these practices is useful.

    B Exercise Set B

EB1. 1.2 Indicate whether the statement describes reporting by the financial accounting function or the
managerial accounting function of an organization.

    A. The users of the report are managers who need a daily summary of work done each shift.
    B. The report is a job cost sheet for jobs completed in a 24-hour period.
    C. The annual report is released each year on the company's website.
    D. The report is audited by the company's certified public accountant firm.
    E. The report is prepared every day because the customer service manager needs information about

          inventory ready to be shipped to customers.

EB2.     1.2 Identify the following as true or false:
    A.  Financial accounting reports are not released to external users.
    B.  Managerial accounting reports are not used by employees inside the organization.
    C.  Managerial accounting reports include only monetary information.
    D.  Financial accounting reports are monetary in nature.
    E.  If a result of a company's operations is nonmonetary in nature, it must be converted to monetary units
        for managerial reporting.
    F.  Tax authorities and government regulatory agencies are external users of financial information.

EB3.     1.2 Companies need to report both monetary and nonmonetary data and information.
    A.  Define these two terms and provide examples of each.
    B.  Discuss what sources are available that provide companies with both types of data and information.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers                                                                    67

EB4. 1.3 Marvin has been thinking about the fields of managerial and financial accounting and the
functions of management within an organization. He has the following list of statements to understand.
Identify them as true or false.

    A. Managerial accounting reports are prepared only quarterly and annually.
    B. Financial accounting reports are general-purpose reports.
    C. Managerial accounting reports pertain to subunits of the business.
    D. Managerial accounting reports must comply with GAAP.
    E. The company treasurer reports directly to the vice president of operations.

EB5. 1.3 Match the term with the description.

A. Chief       i. has responsibilities that include transferring monies between accounts and
Executive      monitoring deposits
Officer
               ii. the corporation officer who has the overall responsibility of the management of a
B. Chief       company
Financial
Officer        iii. a corporate officer who reports to the chief executive officer and oversees all of the
               accounting and finance concerns of a company
C. Enrolled    iv. the financial officer of a corporation reporting to the chief financial officer who is
Agent          responsible for the accounting records and financial statements

D. Cash        v. credential focusing on a career in taxation created by the IRS to signify significant
Management     knowledge of the US tax code
Accountant     vi. Someone who assists in preparing budgets, tracking actual costs and performs other
               tasks that support other management personnel in organizing forecasts and projections
E. Controller

F. Financial
Analyst

EB6. 1.4 The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA) was implemented in 1977. Why was it enacted, and what
are its major provisions?

EB7.     1.4 Indicate whether each of the following statements is true or false.
    A.  Section 302 of Sarbanes-Oxley requires the CEO and CFO to review all financial reports and sign the
    B.  reports.
    C.  One of the three questions put forth by the Institute of Business Ethics is "Do I mind others knowing
    D.  what I have done?"
    E.  Ethical issues may be faced on a small scale, such as making a business decision to produce excess
        inventory for the sole purpose of trying to influence managers' bonuses.
        A manager who spends excess budgeted funds remaining at the end of a fiscal year on unnecessary
        expenditures thinking that it is better to "use it than lose it" is acting ethically.
        The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act was implemented in 2001 to protect investors by enhancing the
        accuracy and reliability of corporate financial statements and disclosures.
68                                                                                Chapter 1 Accounting as a Tool for Managers

     Thought Provokers

TP1. 1.1 Table 1.3 shows how different areas within the business world use the information from
managerial accountants. Think of the ways that the events coordinator for the United Way (a nonprofit
charitable organization) would use each area (planning, controlling, and evaluation).

TP2. 1.1 There are individuals who are under the impression that managerial accounting provides services
mainly for manufacturing organizations. Are they correct? Explain.

TP3. 1.3 Think about the organization chart in Figure 1.7. Describe ways in which each of the accounting
and managerial functions might overlap and complement each other.

TP4. 1.4 Controversy tends to surround the topic of whistleblowers. For example, should they be
considered heroes or traitors? Many pro-whistleblowing policies have been enacted by the federal
government to allow these individuals to reap significant monetary rewards for coming forward and giving
information about behaviors and actions such as corporate fraud and unethical deeds. Many corporate
whistleblowers face negative consequences of their actions, such as reassignment, revenge, and hate crimes,
and are seen as traitors (e.g., Edward Snowden and Gina Gray). Yet Sherron Watkins and Cynthia Cooper were
celebrated as heroes. Look up the stories of Sherron Watkins and Cynthia Cooper. Why do you think that some
whistleblowers are vilified and others made to be heroes?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
     2

              Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

Figure 2.1 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting. How costs behave and how managers can estimate
future costs are the building blocks of managerial accounting. (credit: modification of "Blocks" by "Hey
Paul"/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

 Chapter Outline

  2.1 Distinguish between Merchandising, Manufacturing, and Service Organizations
  2.2 Identify and Apply Basic Cost Behavior Patterns
  2.3 Estimate a Variable and Fixed Cost Equation and Predict Future Costs

      Why It Matters

   Many 16-year-olds in the United States eagerly anticipate having a car of their own and the freedom that
   comes from having their own means of transportation. For many, this means not having to bum a ride from a
   friend, take a bus, hire Uber or Lyft, or worse, borrow the parents' car. However, as appealing as having one's
   own set of wheels sounds, it comes with an array of costs that many young drivers do not anticipate. Some of
   the costs associated with buying and owning a car are fixed, and some vary with the level of activity. For
   example, a driver pays car payments and insurance premiums every month whether or not the car is driven,
   but the cost of maintenance and gas can be controlled by driving less. A driver cannot control the price of
   gasoline or the mechanic's hourly wage but can control how much of each is used each month.
   Just as car owners incur a variety of costs--fixed, variable, controllable, and uncontrollable--businesses incur
   these types of costs as well. The goal of managerial accountants is to use this cost information to assist
   management in both long- and short-term decision-making. Managerial accounting follows standards and
   best practices for reporting cost data that are less formal than those used for financial accounting. This means
   management often has the discretion to determine how costs are used internally.
   Since businesses collect and analyze cost data for internal use, there may be distinct differences among
70                                                                                Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

businesses in how they estimate and treat certain costs. What does not change, regardless of how cost data is
used, are generally agreed upon cost classifications managers use for decision-making. In short, most
businesses incur the same type of costs, but how each firm classifies and manages these costs can vary widely.

 2.1 Distinguish between Merchandising, Manufacturing, and Service
Organizations

Most businesses can be classified into one or more of these three categories: manufacturing, merchandising,
or service. Stated in broad terms, manufacturing firms typically produce a product that is then sold to a
merchandising entity (a retailer) For example, Proctor and Gamble produces a variety of shampoos that it sells
to retailers, such as Walmart, Target, or Walgreens. A service entity provides a service such as accounting or
legal services or cable television and internet connections.

Some companies combine aspects of two or all three of these categories within a single business. If it chooses,
the same company can both produce and market its products directly to consumers. For example, Nike
produces products that it directly sells to consumers and products that it sells to retailers. An example of a
company that fits all three categories is Apple, which produces phones, sells them directly to consumers, and
also provides services, such as extended warranties.

Regardless of whether a business is a manufacturer of products, a retailer selling to the customer, a service
provider, or some combination , all businesses set goals and have strategic plans that guide their operations.
Strategic plans look very different from one company to another. For example, a retailer such as Walmart may
have a strategic plan that focuses on increasing same store sales. Facebook's strategic plan may focus on
increasing subscribers and attracting new advertisers. An accounting firm may have long-term goals to open
offices in neighboring cities in order to serve more clients. Although the goals differ, the process all companies
use to achieve their goals is the same. First, they must develop a plan for how they will achieve the goal, and
then management will gather, analyze, and use information regarding costs to make decisions, implement
plans, and achieve goals.

Table 2.1 lists examples of these costs. Some of these are similar across different types of businesses; others
are unique to a particular business.

                 Type of Business     Costs
Manufacturing Business
                                                                Costs Incurred
Merchandising Business
                                   · Direct labor
                                   · Plant and equipment
                                   · Manufacturing overhead
                                   · Raw materials

                                   · Lease on retail space
                                   · Merchandise inventory
                                   · Retail sales staff

Table 2.1 Some costs, such as raw materials, are unique to a particular type of business. Other costs, such as
billing and collections, are common to most businesses, regardless of the type.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting                                               71

                 Type of Business                      Costs
Service Business
                                                                                 Costs Incurred

                                                    · Billing and collections
                                                    · Computer network equipment
                                                    · Professional staff

Table 2.1 Some costs, such as raw materials, are unique to a particular type of business. Other costs, such as
billing and collections, are common to most businesses, regardless of the type.

Knowing the basic characteristics of each cost category is important to understanding how businesses
measure, classify, and control costs.

Merchandising Organizations

A merchandising firm is one of the most common types of businesses. A merchandising firm is a business
that purchases finished products and resells them to consumers. Consider your local grocery store or retail
clothing store. Both of these are merchandising firms. Often, merchandising firms are referred to as resellers
or retailers since they are in the business of reselling a product to the consumer at a profit.

Think about purchasing toothpaste from your local drug store. The drug store purchases tens of thousands of
tubes of toothpaste from a wholesale distributor or manufacturer in order to get a better per-tube cost. Then,
they add their mark-up (or profit margin) to the toothpaste and offer it for sale to you. The drug store did not
manufacture the toothpaste; instead, they are reselling a toothpaste that they purchased. Virtually all of your
daily purchases are made from merchandising firms such as Walmart, Target, Macy's, Walgreens, and
AutoZone.

Merchandising firms account for their costs in a different way from other types of business organizations. To
understand merchandising costs, Figure 2.2 shows a simplified income statement for a merchandising firm:

Figure 2.2 Simplified Income Statement for a Merchandising Firm. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

This simplified income statement demonstrates how merchandising firms account for their sales cycle or
process. Sales revenue is the income generated from the sale of finished goods to consumers rather than from
the manufacture of goods or provision of services. Since a merchandising firm has to purchase goods for
resale, they account for this cost as cost of goods sold--what it cost them to acquire the goods that are then
sold to the customer. The difference between what the drug store paid for the toothpaste and the revenue
generated by selling the toothpaste to consumers is their gross profit. However, in order to generate sales
revenue, merchandising firms incur expenses related to the process of operating their business and selling the
merchandise. These costs are called operating expenses, and the business must deduct them from the gross
72  Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

profit to determine the operating profit. (Note that while the terms "operating profit" and "operating income"
are often used interchangeably, in real-world interactions you should confirm exactly what the user means in
using those terms.) Operating expenses incurred by a merchandising firm include insurance, marketing,
administrative salaries, and rent.

Figure 2.3 Shopping Mall. Merchandising firms must identify and manage their costs to remain competitive
and attract customers to their business. (credit: "stairs shopping mall" by "jarmoluk"/Pixabay, CC0)

   CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
   Balancing Revenue and Expenses

   Plum Crazy is a small boutique selling the latest in fashion trends. They purchase clothing and fashion
   accessories from several distributors and manufacturers for resale. In 2017, they reported these revenue
   and expenses:

   Before examining the income statement, let's look at Cost of Goods Sold in more detail. Merchandising
   companies have to account for inventory, a topic covered in Inventory (http://cnx.org/content/m67888/
   latest/) . As you recall, merchandising companies carry inventory from one period to another. When they
   prepare their income statement, a crucial step is identifying the actual cost of goods that were sold for
   the period. For Plum Crazy, their Cost of Goods Sold was calculated as shown in Figure 2.4.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting                                                          73

Figure 2.4 Plum Crazy's Cost of Goods Sold Statement. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Once the calculation of the Cost of Goods Sold has been completed, Plum Crazy can now construct their
income statement, which would appear as shown in Figure 2.5.

Figure 2.5 Plum Crazy's Income Statement. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Since merchandising firms must pass the cost of goods on to the consumer to earn a profit, they are
extremely cost sensitive. Large merchandising businesses like Walmart, Target, and Best Buy manage
costs by buying in bulk and negotiating with manufacturers and suppliers to drive the per-unit cost.

CONTINUING APPLICATION AT WORK

Introduction to the Gearhead Outfitters Story

Gearhead Outfitters, founded by Ted Herget in 1997 in Jonesboro, AR, is a retail chain which sells outdoor
74                                                                                Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

   gear for men, women, and children. The company's inventory includes clothing, footwear for hiking and
   running, camping gear, backpacks, and accessories, by brands such as The North Face, Birkenstock,
   Wolverine, Yeti, Altra, Mizuno, and Patagonia. Ted fell in love with the outdoor lifestyle while working as a
   ski instructor in Colorado and wanted to bring that feeling back home to Arkansas. And so, Gearhead
   was born in a small downtown location in Jonesboro. The company has had great success over the years,
   expanding to numerous locations in Ted's home state, as well as Louisiana, Oklahoma, and Missouri.
   While Ted knew his industry when starting Gearhead, like many entrepreneurs he faced regulatory and
   financial issues which were new to him. Several of these issues were related to accounting and the
   wealth of decision-making information which accounting systems provide.
   For example, measuring revenue and expenses, providing information about cash flow to potential
   lenders, analyzing whether profit and positive cash flow is sustainable to allow for expansion, and
   managing inventory levels. Accounting, or the preparation of financial statements (balance sheet,
   income statement, and statement of cash flows), provides the mechanism for business owners such as
   Ted to make fundamentally sound business decisions.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Walmart is inarguably a retail giant, but how did the company become so successful? Read the article
   about how low costs have allowed Walmart to keep prices low while still making a large profit
   (https://openstax.org/l/50Walmart) to learn more.

Manufacturing Organizations

A manufacturing organization is a business that uses parts, components, or raw materials to produce
finished goods (Figure 2.6). These finished goods are sold either directly to the consumer or to other
manufacturing firms that use them as a component part to produce a finished product. For example, Diehard
manufactures automobile batteries that are sold directly to consumers by retail outlets such as AutoZone,
Costco, and Advance Auto. However, these batteries are also sold to automobile manufacturers such as Ford,
Chevrolet, or Toyota to be installed in cars during the manufacturing process. Regardless of who the final
consumer of the final product is, Diehard must control its costs so that the sale of batteries generates revenue
sufficient to keep the organization profitable.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting  75

Figure 2.6 Manufacturing firms apply direct labor to raw materials in order to produce the finished goods
purchased from retailers. (credit: "work manufactures" by "dodaning0"/Pixabay, CC0)

Manufacturing firms are more complex organizations than merchandising firms and therefore have a larger
variety of costs to control. For example, a merchandising firm may purchase furniture to sell to consumers,
whereas a manufacturing firm must acquire raw materials such as lumber, paint, hardware, glue, and varnish
that they transform into furniture. The manufacturer incurs additional costs, such as direct labor, to convert
the raw materials into furniture. Operating a physical plant where the production process takes place also
generates costs. Some of these costs are tied directly to production, while others are general expenses
necessary to operate the business. Because the manufacturing process can be highly complex, manufacturing
firms constantly evaluate their production processes to determine where cost savings are possible.

   CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

   Cost Control

   Controlling costs is an integral function of all managers, but companies often hire personnel to
   specifically oversee cost control. As you've learned, controlling costs is vital in all industries, but at Hilton
   Hotels, they translate this into the position of Cost Controller. Here is an excerpt from one of Hilton's
   recent job postings.
   Position Title: Cost Controller
   Job Description: "A Cost Controller will work with all Heads of Departments to effectively control all
   products that enter and exit the hotel."[1]
76  Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

    Job Requirements:

    "As Cost Controller, you will work with all Heads of Departments to effectively control all products that
    enter and exit the hotel. Specifically, you will be responsible for performing the following tasks to the
    highest standards:

      · Review the daily intake of products into the hotel and ensure accurate pricing and quantity of goods
          received

      · Control the stores by ensuring accuracy of inventory and stock control and the pricing of goods
          received

      · Alert relevant parties of slow-moving goods and goods nearing expiry dates to reduce waste and
          alter product purchasing to accommodate

      · Manage cost reporting on a weekly basis
      · Attend finance meetings, as required
      · Maintain good communication and working relationships with all hotel areas
      · Act in accordance with fire, health and safety regulations and follow the correct procedures when

          required"[2]

    As you can see, the individual in this position will interact with others across the organization to find ways
    to control costs for the benefit of the company. Some of the benefits of cost control include:

      · Lowering overall company expenses, thereby increasing net income.
      · Freeing up financial resources for investment in research & development of new or improved

          products, goods, or services
      · Providing funding for employee development and training, benefits, and bonuses
      · Allowing corporate earnings to be used to support humanitarian and charitable causes

Manufacturing organizations account for costs in a way that is similar to that of merchandising firms.
However, as you will learn, there is a significant difference in the calculation of cost of goods sold. Figure 2.7
shows a simplification of the income statement for a manufacturing firm:

Figure 2.7 Simplified Income Statement for a Manufacturing Firm. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

At first it appears that there is no difference between the income statements of the merchandising firm and
the manufacturing firm. However, the difference is in how these two types of firms account for the cost of
goods sold. Merchandising firms determine their cost of goods sold by accounting for both existing inventory
and new purchases, as shown in the Plum Crazy example. It is typically easy for merchandising firms to
calculate their costs because they know exactly what they paid for their merchandise.

1 Hilton. "Cost Controller: Job Description." Hosco. https://www.hosco.com/en/job/hilton-istanbul-bomonti-hotel-conference-center/cost-
controller
2 Hilton. "Cost Controller: Job Description." Hosco. https://www.hosco.com/en/job/hilton-istanbul-bomonti-hotel-conference-center/cost-
controller

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting  77

Unlike merchandising firms, manufacturing firms must calculate their cost of goods sold based on how much
they manufacture and how much it costs them to manufacture those goods. This requires manufacturing
firms to prepare an additional statement before they can prepare their income statement. This additional
statement is the Cost of Goods Manufactured statement. Once the cost of goods manufactured is calculated, the
cost is then incorporated into the manufacturing firm's income statement to calculate its cost of goods sold.

One thing manufacturing firms must consider in their cost of goods manufactured is that, at any given time,
they have products at varying levels of production: some are finished and others are still process. The cost of
goods manufactured statement measures the cost of the goods actually finished during the period, whether
or not they were started during that period.

Before examining the typical manufacturing firm's process to track cost of goods manufactured, you need
basic definitions of three terms in the schedule of Costs of Goods Manufactured: direct materials, direct labor,
and manufacturing overhead. Direct materials are the components used in the production process whose
costs can be identified on a per item-produced basis. For example, if you are producing cars, the engine would
be a direct material item. The direct material cost would be the cost of one engine. Direct labor represents
production labor costs that can be identified on a per item-produced basis. Referring to the car production
example, assume that the engines are placed in the car by individuals rather than by an automated process.
The direct labor cost would be the amount of labor in hours multiplied by the hourly labor cost.
Manufacturing overhead generally includes those costs incurred in the production process that are not
economically feasible to measure as direct material or direct labor costs. Examples include the department
manager's salary, the production factory's utilities, or glue used to attach rubber molding in the auto
production process. Since there are so many possible costs that can be classified as manufacturing overhead,
they tend to be grouped and then allocated in a predetermined manner to the production process.

Figure 2.8 is an example of the calculation of the Cost of Goods Manufactured for Koeller Manufacturing. It
demonstrates the relationship between cost of goods manufactured and cost of goods in progress and
includes the three main types of manufacturing costs.

Figure 2.8 Koeller Manufacturing's Cost of Goods Manufactured. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

As you can see, the manufacturing firm takes into account its work-in-process (WIP) inventory as well as the
costs incurred during the current period to finish not only the units that were in the beginning WIP inventory,
but also a portion of any production that was started but not finished during the month. Notice that the
current manufacturing costs, or the additional costs incurred during the month, include direct materials, direct
78                                                                                Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

labor, and manufacturing overhead. Direct materials are calculated as

All of these costs are carefully tracked and classified because the cost of manufacturing is a vital component of
the schedule of cost of goods sold. To continue with the example, Koeller Manufacturing calculated that the
cost of goods sold was $95,000, which is carried through to the Schedule of Cost of Goods Sold (Figure 2.9).

Figure 2.9 Koeller Manufacturing's Cost of Goods Sold. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Now when Koeller Manufacturing prepares its income statement, the simplified statement will appear as
shown in Figure 2.10.

Figure 2.10 Koeller Manufacturing's Income Statement. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

So, even though the income statements for the merchandising firm and the manufacturing firm appear very
similar at first glance, there are many more costs to be captured by the manufacturing firm. Figure 2.11
compares and contrasts the methods merchandising and manufacturing firms use to calculate the cost of
goods sold in their income statement.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting                                                           79

Figure 2.11 Merchandising firms consider the cost of goods purchased, and manufacturing firms consider
the cost of goods manufactured in order to determine the cost of goods sold. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

   CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
   Calculating Cost of Goods Sold in Manufacturing

   Just Desserts is a bakery that produces and sells cakes and pies to grocery stores for resale. Although
   they are a small manufacturer, they incur many of the costs of a much larger organization. In 2017, they
   reported these revenue and expenses:

   Their income statement is shown in Figure 2.12.
80  Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

   Figure 2.12 Just Desserts' Income Statement. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under
   CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

   You'll learn more about the flow of manufacturing costs in Identify and Apply Basic Cost Behavior
   Patterns. For now, recognize that, unlike a merchandising firm, calculating cost of goods sold in
   manufacturing firms can be a complex task for management.

Service Organizations

A service organization is a business that earns revenue by providing intangible products, those that have no
physical substance. The service industry is a vital sector of the U.S. economy, providing 65% of the U.S. private-
sector gross domestic product and more than 79% of U.S. private-sector jobs.[3] If tangible products, physical
goods that customers can handle and see, are provided by a service organization, they are considered ancillary
sources of revenue. Large service organizations such as airlines, insurance companies, and hospitals incur a
variety of costs in the provision of their services. Costs such as labor, supplies, equipment, advertising, and
facility maintenance can quickly spiral out of control if management is not careful. Therefore, although their
cost drivers are sometimes not as complex as those of other types of firms, cost identification and control are
every bit as important in the service industry.
For example, consider the services that a law firm provides its clients. What clients pay for are services such as
representation in legal proceedings, contract negotiations, and preparation of wills. Although the true value of
these services is not contained in their physical form, they are of value to the client and the source of revenue
to the firm. The managing partners in the firm must be as cost conscious as their counterparts in
merchandising and manufacturing firms. Accounting for costs in service firms differs from merchandising and
manufacturing firms in that they do not purchase or produce goods. For example, consider a medical practice.
Although some services provided are tangible products, such as medications or medical devices, the primary
benefits the physicians provide their patients are the intangible services that are comprised of his or her
knowledge, experience, and expertise.

3 John Ward. "The Services Sector: How Best to Measure It?" International Trade Administration. Oct. 2010. https://2016.trade.gov/
publications/ita-newsletter/1010/services-sector-how-best-to-measure-it.asp. "United States GDP from Private Services Producing Industries."
Trading Economics / U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. July 2018. https://tradingeconomics.com/united-states/gdp-from-services. "Employment
in Services (% of Total Employment) (Modeled ILO Estimate)." International Labour Organization, ILOSTAT database. The World Bank. Sept.
2018. https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.SRV.EMPL.ZS.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting              81

Service providers have some costs (or revenue) derived from tangible goods that must be taken into account
when pricing their services, but their largest cost categories are more likely to be administrative and personnel
costs rather than product costs.

For example, Whichard & Klein, LLP, is a full-service accounting firm with their primary offices in Baltimore,
Maryland. With two senior partners and a small staff of accountants and payroll specialists, the majority of the
costs they incur are related to personnel. The value of the accounting and payroll services they provide to their
clients is intangible in comparison to goods sold by a merchandiser or produced by a manufacturer but has
value and is the primary source of revenue for the firm. At the end of 2019, Whichard and Klein reported the
following revenue and expenses:

Their Income Statement for the period is shown in Figure 2.13.

Figure 2.13 Whichard & Klein's Income Statement. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under
CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

The bulk of the expenses incurred by Whichard & Klein are in personnel and administrative/office costs, which
are very common among businesses that have services as their primary source of revenue.

   CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

   Revenue and Expenses for a Law Office

   The revenue and expenses for a law firm illustrate how the income statement for a service firm differs
   from that of a merchandising or manufacturing firm.
82                                                   Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

    Welch & Graham is a well-established law firm that provides legal services in the areas of criminal law,
    real estate transactions, and personal injury. The firm employs several attorneys, paralegals, and office
    support staff. In 2017, they reported the following revenue and expenses:

    Their income statement is shown in Figure 2.14.

   Figure 2.14 Welch & Graham's Income Statement. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
   under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

   As you can see, the majority of the costs incurred by the law firm are personnel related. They may also
   incur costs from equipment and materials such computer networks, phone and switchboard equipment,
   rent, insurance, and law library materials necessary to support the practice, but these costs represent a
   much smaller percentage of total cost than the administrative and personnel costs.

   THINK IT THROUGH

   Expanding a Business

   Margo is the owner of a small retail business that sells gifts and home decorating accessories. Her
   business is well established, and she is now considering taking over additional retail space to expand her
   business to include gourmet foods and gift baskets. Based on customer feedback, she is confident that
   there is a demand for these items, but she is unsure how large that demand really is. Expanding her
   business this way will require that she incur not only new costs but also increases in existing costs.
   Margo has asked for your help in identifying the impact of her decision to expand in terms of her costs.
   When discussing these cost increases, be sure to specifically identify those costs that are directly tied to

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting            83

her products and that would be considered overhead expenses.

 2.2 Identify and Apply Basic Cost Behavior Patterns

Now that we have identified the three key types of businesses, let's identify cost behaviors and apply them to
the business environment. In managerial accounting, different companies use the term cost in different ways
depending on how they will use the cost information. Different decisions require different costs classified in
different ways. For instance, a manager may need cost information to plan for the coming year or to make
decisions about expanding or discontinuing a product or service. In practice, the classification of costs changes
as the use of the cost data changes. In fact, a single cost, such as rent, may be classified by one company as a
fixed cost, by another company as a committed cost, and by even another company as a period cost.
Understanding different cost classifications and how certain costs can be used in different ways is critical to
managerial accounting.

   ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

   Institute of Management Accountants and Certified Management Accountant Certification

   Managerial accountants provide businesses with clear and direct insight into the monetary effects of any
   particular operational action under consideration. They are expected to report financial information in a
   transparent and ethical fashion. The Institute of Management Accountants (IMA) offers the Certified
   Management Accountant (CMA) certification. IMA members and CMAs agree to uphold a set of ethical
   principles that includes honesty, fairness, objectivity, and responsibility. Any managerial accountant,
   even if not an IMA member or certified CMA, should act in accordance with these principles and
   encourage coworkers to follow ethical principles for reporting financial results and monetary effects of
   financial decisions related to their organization. The IMA Committee on Ethics encourages organizations
   and individuals to adopt, promote, and execute business practices consistent with high ethical
   standards.[4]

Major Cost Behavior Patterns

Any discussion of costs begins with the understanding that most costs will be classified in one of three ways:
fixed costs, variable costs, or mixed costs. The costs that don't fall into one of these three categories are hybrid
costs, which are examined only briefly because they are addressed in more advanced accounting courses.
Because fixed and variable costs are the foundation of all other cost classifications, understanding whether a
cost is a fixed cost or a variable cost is very important.

Fixed versus Variable Costs

A fixed cost is an unavoidable operating expense that does not change in total over the short term, even if a

4 "Ethics Center." Institute of Management Accountants. https://www.imanet.org/career-resources/ethics-center?ssopc=1
84                  Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

business experiences variation in its level of activity. Table 2.2 illustrates the types of fixed costs for
merchandising, service, and manufacturing organizations.

  Type of Business                         Examples of Fixed Costs
Merchandising                                                          Fixed Cost
Manufacturing
Service             Rent, insurance, managers' salaries
                    Property taxes, insurance, equipment leases
                    Rent, straight-line depreciation, administrative salaries, and insurance

Table 2.2

We have established that fixed costs do not change in total as the level of activity changes, but what about
fixed costs on a per-unit basis? Let's examine Tony's screen-printing company to illustrate how costs can
remain fixed in total but change on a per-unit basis.

Tony operates a screen-printing company, specializing in custom T-shirts. One of his fixed costs is his monthly
rent of $1,000. Regardless of whether he produces and sells any T-shirts, he is obligated under his lease to pay
$1,000 per month. However, he can consider this fixed cost on a per-unit basis, as shown in Figure 2.15.

Figure 2.15 Individual Rent Cost per T-Shirt Produced. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Tony's information illustrates that, despite the unchanging fixed cost of rent, as the level of activity increases,
the per-unit fixed cost falls. In other words, fixed costs remain fixed in total but can increase or decrease on a
per-unit basis.
Two specialized types of fixed costs are committed fixed costs and discretionary fixed costs. These
classifications are generally used for long-range planning purposes and are covered in upper-level managerial
accounting courses, so they are only briefly described here.
Committed fixed costs are fixed costs that typically cannot be eliminated if the company is going to continue to
function. An example would be the lease of factory equipment for a production company.
Discretionary fixed costs generally are fixed costs that can be incurred during some periods and postponed
during other periods but which cannot normally be eliminated permanently. Examples could include
advertising campaigns and employee training. Both of these costs could potentially be postponed temporarily,
but the company would probably incur negative effects if the costs were permanently eliminated. These
classifications are generally used for long-range planning purposes.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting                                           85

In addition to understanding fixed costs, it is critical to understand variable costs, the second fundamental
cost classification. A variable cost is one that varies in direct proportion to the level of activity within the
business. Typical costs that are classified as variable costs are the cost of raw materials used to produce a
product, labor applied directly to the production of the product, and overhead expenses that change based
upon activity. For each variable cost, there is some activity that drives the variable cost up or down. A cost
driver is defined as any activity that causes the organization to incur a variable cost. Examples of cost drivers
are direct labor hours, machine hours, units produced, and units sold. Table 2.3 provides examples of variable
costs and their associated cost drivers.

               Variable Costs and Associated Cost Drivers

               Variable Cost                                 Cost Driver

Merchandising  Total monthly hourly wages for sales staff    Hours business is open during
Manufacturing                                                month
Service
               Direct materials used to produce one unit of  Number of units produced
               product

               Cost of laundering linens and towels          Number of hotel rooms occupied

Table 2.3

Unlike fixed costs that remain fixed in total but change on a per-unit basis, variable costs remain the same per
unit, but change in total relative to the level of activity in the business. Revisiting Tony's T-Shirts, Figure 2.16
shows how the variable cost of ink behaves as the level of activity changes.

Figure 2.16  Variable Costs per Unit. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
license)

As Figure 2.16 shows, the variable cost per unit (per T-shirt) does not change as the number of T-shirts
produced increases or decreases. However, the variable costs change in total as the number of units produced
increases or decreases. In short, total variable costs rise and fall as the level of activity (the cost driver) rises
and falls.

Distinguishing between fixed and variable costs is critical because the total cost is the sum of all fixed costs
(the total fixed costs) and all variable costs (the total variable costs). For every unit produced, every
customer served, or every hotel room rented, for example, managers can determine their total costs both per
unit of activity and in total by combining their fixed and variable costs together. The graphic in Figure 2.17
illustrates the concept of total costs.
86  Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

Figure 2.17 Total Cost as the Sum of Total Fixed Costs and Total Variable Costs. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Remember that the reason that organizations take the time and effort to classify costs as either fixed or
variable is to be able to control costs. When they classify costs properly, managers can use cost data to make
decisions and plan for the future of the business.

   CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

   Boeing[5]

   If you've ever flown on an airplane, there's a good chance you know Boeing. The Boeing Company
   generates around $90 billion each year from selling thousands of airplanes to commercial and military
   customers around the world. It employs around 200,000 people, and it's indirectly responsible for more
   than a million jobs through its suppliers, contractors, regulators, and others. Its main assembly line in
   Everett, WA, is housed in the largest building in the world, a colossal facility that covers nearly a half-
   trillion cubic feet. Boeing is, simply put, a massive enterprise.
   And yet, Boeing's managers know the exact cost of everything the company uses to produce its
   airplanes: every propeller, flap, seat belt, welder, computer programmer, and so forth. Moreover, they
   know how those costs would change if they produced more airplanes or fewer. They also know the price
   at which they sold each plane and the profit the company made on each sale. Boeing's executives expect
   their managers to know this information, in real time, if the company is to remain profitable.

5 Attribution: Modification of work by Sharon Kioko and Justin Marlowe. "Cost Analysis." Financial Strategy for Public Managers. CC BY 4.0.
https://press.rebus.community/financialstrategy/chapter/cost-analysis/

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting                                                              87

        Decision  Link between Business Decision and Cost Information Utilized
                                                                     Cost Information
Discontinue a
product line           Variable costs, overhead directly tied to product, potential reduction in fixed costs

Add second             Labor costs, cost of fringe benefits, potential overhead increases (utilities, security
production shift       personnel)
                       Fixed costs, variable operating costs, potential increases in administrative
Open additional        expenses at corporate headquarters
retail outlets

Table 2.4

Average Fixed Costs versus Average Variable Costs

Another way management may want to consider their costs is as average costs. Under this approach,
managers can calculate both average fixed and average variable costs. Average fixed cost (AFC) is the total
fixed costs divided by the total number of units produced, which results in a per-unit cost. The formula is:

To show how a company would use AFC to make business decisions, consider Carolina Yachts, a company that
manufactures sportfishing boats that are sold to consumers through a network of marinas and boat
dealerships. Carolina Yachts produces 625 boats per year, and their total annual fixed costs are $1,560,000. If
they want to determine an average fixed cost per unit, they will find it using the formula for AFC:

                                               AFC = $1,560,000 = $2,496 per boat
                                                              625

When they produce 625 boats, Carolina Yachts has an AFC of $2,496 per boat. What happens to the AFC if they
increase or decrease the number of boats produced? Figure 2.18 shows the AFC for different numbers of
boats.

Figure 2.18 Average Fixed Costs for Carolina Yachts. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under
CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

We see that total fixed costs remain unchanged, but the average fixed cost per unit goes up and down with the
number of boats produced. As more units are produced, the fixed costs are spread out over more units,
making the fixed cost per unit fall. Likewise, as fewer boats are manufactured, the average fixed costs per unit
rises. We can use a similar approach with variable costs.
88                                                                                Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

Average variable cost (AVC) is the total variable costs divided by the total number of units produced, which
results in a per-unit cost. Like ATC, we can use this formula:

To demonstrate AVC, let's return to Carolina Yachts, which incurs total variable costs of $6,875,000 when they
produce 625 boats per year. They can express this as an average variable cost per unit:

                                              AVC = $6,875,000 = $11,000 per boat
                                                             625

Because average variable costs are the average of all costs that change with production levels on a per-unit
basis and include both direct materials and direct labor, managers often use AVC to determine if production
should continue or not in the short run. As long as the price Carolina Yachts receives for their boats is greater
than the per-unit AVC, they know that they are not only covering the variable cost of production, but each boat
is making a contribution toward covering fixed costs. If, at any point, the average variable cost per boat rises
to the point that the price no longer covers the AVC, Carolina Yachts may consider halting production until the
variable costs fall again.
These changes in variable costs per unit could be caused by circumstances beyond their control, such as a
shortage of raw materials or an increase in shipping costs due to high gas prices. In any case, average variable
cost can be useful for managers to get a big picture look at their variable costs per unit.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Watch the video from Khan Academy that uses the scenario of computer programming to teach fixed,
   variable, and marginal cost (https://openstax.org/l/50costing) to learn more.

Mixed Costs and Stepped Costs

Not all costs can be classified as purely fixed or purely variable. Mixed costs are those that have both a fixed
and variable component. It is important, however, to be able to separate mixed costs into their fixed and
variable components because, typically, in the short run, we can only change variable costs but not most fixed
costs. To examine how these mixed costs actually work, consider the Ocean Breeze hotel.
The Ocean Breeze is located in a resort area where the county assesses an occupancy tax that has both a fixed
and a variable component. Ocean Breeze pays $2,000 per month, regardless of the number of rooms rented.
Even if it does not rent a single room during the month, Ocean Breeze still must remit this tax to the county.
The hotel treats this $2,000 as a fixed cost. However, for every night that a room is rented, Ocean Breeze must
remit an additional tax amount of $5.00 per room per night. As a result, the occupancy tax is a mixed cost.
Figure 2.19 further illustrates how this mixed cost behaves.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting                                                               89

Figure 2.19 Mixed Costs Example for Ocean Breeze. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under
CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Notice that Ocean Breeze cannot control the fixed portion of this cost and that it remains fixed in total,
regardless of the activity level. On the other hand, the variable component is fixed per unit, but changes in
total based upon the level of activity. The fixed portion of this cost plus the variable portion of this cost
combine to make the total cost. As a result, the formula for total cost looks like this:

where Y is the total mixed cost, a is the fixed cost, b is the variable cost per unit, and x is the level of activity.
Graphically, mixed costs can be explained as shown in Figure 2.20.

Figure 2.20 Ocean Breeze's Mixed Cost Graph. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

The graph shows that mixed costs are typically both fixed and linear in nature. In other words, they will often
have an initial cost, in Ocean Breeze's case, the $2,000 fixed component of the occupancy tax, and a variable
component, the $5 per night occupancy tax. Note that the Ocean Breeze mixed cost graph starts at an initial
90                                                                                Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

$2,000 for the fixed component and then increases by $5 for each night their rooms are occupied.

Some costs behave less linearly. A cost that changes with the level of activity but is not linear is classified as a
stepped cost. Step costs remain constant at a fixed amount over a range of activity. The range over which
these costs remain unchanged (fixed) is referred to as the relevant range, which is defined as a specific
activity level that is bounded by a minimum and maximum amount. Within this relevant range, managers can
predict revenue or cost levels. Then, at certain points, the step costs increase to a higher amount. Both fixed
and variable costs can take on this stair-step behavior. For instance, wages often act as a stepped variable cost
when employees are paid a flat salary and a commission or when the company pays overtime. Further, when
additional machinery or equipment is placed into service, businesses will see their fixed costs stepped up. The
"trigger" for a cost to step up is the relevant range. Graphically, step costs appear like stair steps (Figure 2.21).

Figure 2.21  Step Cost Graph. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
license)

For example, suppose a quality inspector can inspect a maximum of 80 units in a regular 8-hour shift and his
salary is a fixed cost. Then the relevant range for QA inspection is from 0-80 units per shift. If demand for
these units increases and more than 80 inspections are needed per shift, the relevant range has been
exceeded and the business will have one of two choices:

(1) Pay the quality inspector overtime in order to have the additional units inspected. This overtime will "step
up" the variable cost per unit. The advantage to handling the increased cost in this way is that when demand
falls, the cost can quickly be "stepped down" again. Because these types of step costs can be adjusted quickly
and often, they are often still treated as variable costs for planning purposes.

(2) "Step up" fixed costs. If the company hires a second quality inspector, they would be stepping up their
fixed costs. In effect, they will double the relevant range to allow for a maximum of 160 inspections per shift,
assuming the second QA inspector can inspect an additional 80 units per shift. The down side to this approach
is that once the new QA inspector is hired, if demand falls again, the company will be incurring fixed costs that
are unnecessary. For this reason, adding salaried personnel to address a short-term increase in demand is not
a decision most businesses make.

Step costs are best explained in the context of a business experiencing increases in activity beyond the
relevant range. As an example, let's return to Tony's T-Shirts.

Tony's cost of operations and the associated relevant ranges are shown in Table 2.5.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting                                                    91

                                                    Tony's T-Shirts Cost Options

                                                    Cost  Type of                 Relevant Range
                                                            Cost

Lease on Screen-Printing  $2,000 per                      Fixed     0-2,000 T-shirts per month
Machine                   month
Employee
Tony's Salary             $10 per hour                    Variable  20 shirts per hour

Screen-Printing Ink       $2,500 per                      Fixed     N/A
Building Rent
                          month

                          $0.25 per shirt Variable                  N/A

                          $1,500 per                      Fixed     2 screen-printing machines and 2
                          month                                     employees

Table 2.5

As you can see, Tony has both fixed and variable costs associated with his business. His one screen-printing
machine can only produce 2,000 T-shirts per month and his current employee can produce 20 shirts per hour
(160 per 8-hour work day). The space that Tony leases is large enough that he could add an additional screen-
printing machine and 1 additional employee. If he expands beyond that, he will need to lease a larger space,
and presumably his rent would increase at that point. It is easy for Tony to predict his costs as long as he
operates within the relevant ranges by applying the total cost equation Y = a + bx. So, for Tony, as long as he
produces 2,000 or fewer T-shirts, his total cost will be found by Y = $6,000 + $0.75x, where the variable cost of
$0.75 is the $0.25 cost of the ink per shirt and $0.50 per shirt for labor ($10 per hour wage/20 shirts per hour).
As soon as his production passes the 2,000 T-shirts that his one employee and one machine can handle, he will
have to add a second employee and lease a second screen-printing machine. In other words, his fixed costs
will rise from $6,000 to $8,000, and his variable cost per T-shirt will rise from $0.75 to $1.25 (ink plus 2 workers).
Thus, his new cost equation is Y = $8,000 + $1.25x until he "steps up" again and adds a third machine and
moves to a new location with a presumably higher rent. Let's take a look at this in chart form to better
illustrate the "step" in cost Tony will experience as he steps past 2,000 T-shirts.

Tony's cost information is shown in the chart for volume between 500 and 4,000 shirts.
92  Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

When presented graphically, notice what happens when Tony steps outside of his original relevant range and
has to add a second employee and a second screen-printing machine:

Figure 2.22 Stepped Variable Costs for Tony's T-Shirts. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
It is important to remember that even though Tony's costs stepped up when he exceeded his original capacity
(relevant range), the behavior of the costs did not change. His fixed costs still remained fixed in total and his
total variable cost rose as the number of T-shirts he produced rose. Table 2.6 summarizes how costs behave
within their relevant ranges.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting                                                         93

          Summary of Fixed and Variable Cost Behaviors

  Cost    In Total                                     Per Unit

Variable  Changes in response to the level of          Remains fixed per unit regardless of the level of
Cost      activity                                     activity

Fixed     Does not change with the level of activity,  Changes based upon activity within the relevant
Cost      within the relevant range, but does          range: increased activity decreases per-unit cost;
          change when the relevant range changes       decreased activity increases per-unit cost

Table 2.6

Product versus Period Costs

Many businesses can make decisions by dividing their costs into fixed and variable costs, but there are some
business decisions that require grouping costs differently. Sometimes companies need to consider how those
costs are reported in the financial statements. At other times, companies group costs based on functions
within the business. For example, a business would group administrative and selling expenses by the period
(monthly or quarterly) so that they can be reported on an Income Statement. However, a manufacturing firm
may carry product costs such as materials from one period to the other in order to have the costs "travel" with
the units being produced. It is possible that both the selling and administrative costs and materials costs have
both fixed and variable components. As a result, it may be necessary to analyze some fixed costs together with
some variable costs. Ultimately, businesses strategically group costs in order to make them more useful for
decision-making and planning. Two of the broadest and most common grouping of costs are product costs
and period costs.

Product costs are all those associated with the acquisition or production of goods and products. When
products are purchased for resale, the cost of goods is recorded as an asset on the company's balance sheet.
It is not until the products are sold that they become an expense on the income statement. By moving product
costs to the expense account for the cost of goods sold, they are easily matched to the sales revenue income
account. For example, Bert's Bikes is a bicycle retailer who purchases bikes from several wholesale distributors
and manufacturers. When Bert purchases bicycles for resale, he places the cost of the bikes into his inventory
account, because that is what those bikes are--his inventory available for sale. It is not until someone
purchases a bike that it creates sales revenue, and in order to fulfill the requirements of double-entry
accounting, he must match that income with an expense: the cost of goods sold (Figure 2.23).

Figure 2.23 Journal Entry for Cost of Goods Sold. Product costs are collected in the finished goods inventory,
where they remain until the goods are sold. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-
SA 4.0 license)
94  Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

Some product costs have both a fixed and variable component. For example, Bert purchases 10 bikes for $100
each. The distributor charges $10 per bike for shipping for 1 to 10 bikes but $8 per bike for 11 to 20 bikes. This
shipping cost is fixed per unit but varies in total. If Bert wants to save money and control his cost of goods
sold, he can order an 11th bike and drop his shipping cost by $2 per bike. It is important for Bert to know what
is fixed and what is variable so that he can control his costs as much as possible.

What about the costs Bert incurs that are not product costs? Period costs are simply all of the expenses that
are not product costs, such as all selling and administrative expenses. It is important to remember that period
costs are treated as expenses in the period in which they occur. In other words, they follow the rules of accrual
accounting practice by recognizing the cost (expense) in the period in which they occur regardless of when the
cash changes hands. For example, Bert pays his business insurance in January of each year. Bert's annual
insurance premium is $10,800, which is $900 per month. Each month, Bert will recognize 1/12 of this insurance
cost as an expense in the period in which it is incurred (Figure 2.24).

Figure 2.24 Journal Entry for Insurance Expense. Bert applies 1/12 of the prepaid insurance premium per
month to the expense account in order to match period costs with period revenues. (attribution: Copyright
Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Why is it so important for Bert to know which costs are product costs and which are period costs? Bert may
have little control over his product costs, but he maintains a great deal of control over many of his period
costs. For this reason, it is important that Bert be able to identify his period costs and then determine which of
them are fixed and which are variable. Remember that fixed costs are fixed over the relevant range, but
variable costs change with the level of activity. If Bert wants to control his costs to make his bike business
more profitable, he must be able to differentiate between the costs he can and cannot control.
Just like a merchandising business such as Bert's Bikes, manufacturers also classify their costs as either
product costs or period costs. For a manufacturing business, product costs are the costs associated with
making the product, and period costs are all other costs. For the purposes of external reporting, separating
costs into period and product costs is not all that is necessary. However, for management decision-making
activities, refinement of the types of product costs is helpful.
In a manufacturing firm, the need for management to be aware of the types of costs that make up the cost of
a product is of paramount importance. Let's look at Carolina Yachts again and examine how they can classify
the product costs associated with building their sportfishing boats. Just like automobiles, every year, Carolina
Yachts makes changes to their boats, introducing new models to their product line. When the engineers begin
to redesign boats for the next year, they must be careful not to make changes that would drive the selling
price of their boats too high, making them less attractive to the customer. The engineers need to know exactly
what the addition of another feature will do to the cost of production. It is not enough for them to get total
product cost data; instead, they need specific information about the three classes of product costs: materials,
labor, and overhead.
As you've learned, direct materials are the raw materials and component parts that are directly economically

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting                                                  95

traceable to a unit of production.
Table 2.7 provides some examples of direct materials.

                                                    Examples of Direct Materials

        Manufacturing Business                            Product                 Direct Materials
Bakery
Automobile manufacturer                             Birthday cakes  Flour, sugar, eggs, milk
Furniture manufacturer
                                                    Cars            Glass, steel, tires, carpet

                                                    Recliners       Wood, fabric, cotton batting

Table 2.7

In each of the examples, managers are able to trace the cost of the materials directly to a specific unit (cake,
car, or chair) produced. Since the amount of direct materials required will change based on the number of
units produced, direct materials are almost always classified as a variable cost. They remain fixed per unit of
production but change in total based on the level of activity within the business.

It takes more than materials for Carolina Yachts to build a boat. It requires the application of labor to the raw
materials and component parts. You've also learned that direct labor is the work of the employees who are
directly involved in the production of goods or services. In fact, for many industries, the largest cost incurred in
the production process is labor. For Carolina Yachts, their direct labor would include the wages paid to the
carpenters, painters, electricians, and welders who build the boats. Like direct materials, direct labor is
typically treated as a variable cost because it varies with the level of activity. However, there are some
companies that pay a flat weekly or monthly salary for production workers, and for these employees, their
compensation could be classified as a fixed cost. For example, many auto mechanics are now paid a flat weekly
or monthly salary.

While in the example Carolina Yachts is dependent upon direct labor, the production process for companies in
many industries is moving from human labor to a more automated production process. For these companies,
direct labor in these industries is becoming less significant. For an example, you can research the current
production process for the automobile industry.

The third major classification of product costs for a manufacturing business is overhead. Manufacturing
overhead (sometimes referred to as factory overhead) includes all of the costs that a manufacturing business
incurs, other than the variable costs of direct materials and direct labor required to build products. These
overhead costs are not directly attributable to a specific unit of production, but they are incurred to support
the production of goods. Some of the items included in manufacturing overhead include supervisor salaries,
depreciation on the factory, maintenance, insurance, and utilities. It is important to note that manufacturing
overhead does not include any of the selling or administrative functions of a business. For Carolina Yachts,
costs like the sales, marketing, CEO, and clerical staff salaries will not be included in the calculation of
manufacturing overhead costs but will instead be allocated to selling and administrative expenses.

As you have learned, much of the power of managerial accounting is its ability to break costs down into the
smallest possible trackable unit. This also applies to manufacturing overhead. In many cases, businesses have
a need to further refine their overhead costs and will track indirect labor and indirect materials.

When labor costs are incurred but are not directly involved in the active conversion of materials into finished
96                                                                                Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

products, they are classified as indirect labor costs. For example, Carolina Yachts has production supervisors
who oversee the manufacturing process but do not actively participate in the construction of the boats. Their
wages generally support the production process but cannot be traced back to a single unit. For this reason, the
production supervisors' salary would be classified as indirect labor. Similar to direct labor, on a product or
department basis, indirect labor, such as the supervisor's salary, is often treated as a fixed cost, assuming that
it does not vary with the level of activity or number of units produced. However, if you are considering the
supervisor's salary cost on a per unit of production basis, then it could be considered a variable cost.

Similarly, not all materials used in the production process can be traced back to a specific unit of production.
When this is the case, they are classified as indirect material costs. Although needed to produce the product,
these indirect material costs are not traceable to a specific unit of production. For Carolina Yachts, their indirect
materials include supplies like tools, glue, wax, and cleaning supplies. These materials are required to build a
boat, but management cannot easily track how much of a bottle of glue they use or how often they use a
particular drill to build a specific boat. These indirect materials and their associated cost represent a small
fraction of the total materials needed to complete a unit of production. Like direct materials, indirect materials
are classified as a variable cost since they vary with the level of production. Table 2.8 provides some examples
of manufacturing costs and their classifications.

                          Examples of Classifications of Manufacturing Costs

                    Cost                                                          Classification  Fixed or Variable
                                                                                                  Fixed
Production supervisor salary      Indirect labor                                                  Variable
                                                                                                  Variable
Raw materials used in production  Direct materials                                                Fixed
                                                                                                  Variable
Wages of production employees     Direct labor

Straight-line depreciation on factory equipment General manufacturing overhead

Glue and adhesives                Indirect materials

Table 2.8

Prime Costs versus Conversion Costs

In certain production environments, once a business has separated the costs of the product into direct
materials, direct labor, and overhead, the costs can then be gathered into two broader categories: prime costs
and conversion costs. Prime costs are the direct material expenses and direct labor costs, while conversion
costs are direct labor and general factory overhead combined. Please note that these two categories of costs
are examples of cost categories where a particular cost can be included in both. In this case, direct labor is
included in both prime costs and conversion costs.

These cost classifications are common in businesses that produce large quantities of an item that is then
packaged into smaller, sellable quantities such as soft drinks or cereal. In these types of production
environments, it easier to lump the costs of direct labor and overhead into one category, since these costs are
what are needed to convert raw materials into a finished product. This method of costing is termed process
costing and is covered in Process Costing.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting                                                               97

Although it seems as if there are many classifications or labels associated with costs, remember that the
purpose of cost classification is to assist managers in the decision-making process. Since this type of data is
not used for external reporting purposes, it is important to understand that (1) a single cost can have many
different labels; (2) the terms are used independently, not simultaneously; and (3) each classification is
important to understand in order to make business decisions. Figure 2.25 uses some example costs to
demonstrate these principles.

Figure 2.25 Classification Based on Cost Function. Costs can fall into more than one category, sometimes
making the process of cost identification complex. DM, direct materials; DL, direct labor; OH, overhead.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Effects of Changes in Activity Level on Unit Costs and Total Costs

We have spent considerable time identifying and describing the various ways that businesses categorize costs.
However, categorization itself is not enough. It is important not only to understand the categorization of costs
but to understand the relationships between changes in activity levels and the changes in costs in total. It is
worth repeating that when a cost is considered to be fixed, that cost is only fixed for the relevant range. Once
the boundary of the relevant range has been reached or moved beyond, fixed costs will change and then
remain fixed for the new relevant range. Remember that, within a relevant range of activity, where the relevant
range refers to a specific activity level that is bounded by a minimum and maximum amount, total fixed costs
are constant, but costs change on a per-unit basis. Let's examine an example that demonstrates how changes
in activity can affect costs.

   ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

   Cost Accounting Helps Reduce Fraud and Promotes Ethical Behavior

   Managerial and related cost accounting systems assist managers in making ethical and sound business
   decisions. Managerial accountants implement accounting reporting systems to minimize or prevent
   fraud and promote ethical decision-making. For example, tracking changes in costing activity and
   ensuring that activity remains in a relevant range, helps ensure that an organization's business activity is
   properly bounded within a reasonable range of expense. If the minimum or maximum expense range is
98                                                                                Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

    exceeded, this can indicate that management is acting without authority or is pursuing unauthorized
    activities. Excessive costs may even be a red flag that possible fraud is occurring. Cost accounting helps
    ensure that financial costs are within an acceptable range and helps an organization make reliable
    forward-looking financial decisions.

Comprehensive Example of the Effect on Changes in Activity Level on Costs

Pat is planning a three-day ski trip on his spring break after he works on a Habitat for Humanity project in
Dallas. The costs for the trip are as follows:

He is considering his costs for the trip if he goes alone, or if he takes one, two, three, or four friends. However,
before he can begin his analysis, he needs to consider the characteristics of the costs. Some of the costs will
stay the same no matter how many people go, and some of the costs will fluctuate, based on the number of
participants.
Those costs that do not change are the fixed costs. Once you incur a fixed cost, it does not change within a
given range. For example, Pat can take up to five people in one car, so the cost of the car is fixed for up to five
people. However, if he took more friends, then he would need more cars. The condo rental and the gasoline
expenses would also be considered fixed costs, because they are not going to change in the reference range.
The costs that do change as the number of participants change are the variable costs. The food and lift ticket
expenses are examples of variable costs, since they fluctuate based upon the number of participants and the
number of days of activities.
In analyzing the costs, Pat also needs to consider the total costs and average costs. The analysis will calculate
the average fixed costs, the total fixed costs, the average variable costs, and the total variable costs.
In the analysis of total costs versus average costs, both total and average fixed costs will stay the same and
total and average variable costs will change. Here are the total fixed costs:

The total fixed costs for the trip will be $720.00, no matter whether Pat goes alone or takes up to 4 friends.
However, the average fixed costs will be the total fixed costs divided by the number of participants. The
average fixed cost could range from $720 (720/1) to $144 (720/5).
Here are the variable costs:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting                                                                 99

The average variable cost will be $70.00 per person per day, no matter how many people go on the trip.
However, the total variable costs will range from $70.00, if Pat goes alone, to $350.00, if five people go.
Figure 2.26 shows the relationships of the various costs, based on the number of participants.

Figure 2.26 Comprehensive Ski Trip Cost Classification. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Looking at this analysis, it is clear that, if there is an activity that you think that you cannot afford, it can
become less expensive if you are creative in your cost-sharing techniques.

   YOUR TURN

   Spring Break Trip Planning

   Margo is planning an 8-day spring break trip from Atlanta, Georgia, to Tampa, Florida, leaving on Sunday
   and returning the following Sunday. She has located a condominium on the beach and has put a deposit
   down on the unit. The rental company has a maximum occupancy for the condominium of seven adults.
   There is an amusement park that she plans to visit. She is going to use her parents' car, an SUV that can
   carry up to six people and their luggage. The SUV can travel an average of 20 miles per gallon, the total
   distance is approximately 1,250 miles (550 miles each way plus driving around Tampa every day), and the
   average price of gas is $3 per gallon. A season pass for an amusement park she wants to visit is $168 per
   person. Margo estimates spending $40 per day per person for food. She estimates the costs for the trip
   as follows:

   Now that she has cost estimates, she is trying to decide how many of her friends she wants to invite.
   Since the car can only seat six people, Marg made a list of five other girls to invite. Use her data to
   answer the following questions and fill out the cost table:

     1. What are the total variable costs for the trip?
     2. What are the average variable costs for the trip?
100                                                              Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

     3. What are the total fixed costs for the trip?
     4. What are the average fixed costs for the trip?
     5. What are the average costs per person for the trip?
     6. What would the trip cost Margo if she were to go alone?

     7. What additional costs would be incurred if a seventh girl was invited on the trip? Would this be a
          wise decision (from a cost perspective)? Why or why not?

     8. Which cost will not be affected if a seventh girl was invited on the trip?
   Solution

   Answers will vary. All responses should recognize that there is no room in the car for the seventh girl and
   her luggage, although the condominium will accommodate the extra person. This means they will have
   to either find a larger vehicle and incur higher gas expenses or take a second car, which will at least
   double the fixed gas cost.

 2.3 Estimate a Variable and Fixed Cost Equation and Predict Future Costs

Sometimes, a business will need to use cost estimation techniques, particularly in the case of mixed costs, so
that they can separate the fixed and variable components, since only the variable components change in the
short run. Estimation is also useful for using current data to predict the effects of future changes in production
on total costs. Three estimation techniques that can be used include the scatter graph, the high-low method,
and regression analysis. Here we will demonstrate the scatter graph and the high-low methods (you will learn
the regression analysis technique in advanced managerial accounting courses.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting                                           101

Functions of Cost Equations

The cost equation is a linear equation that takes into consideration total fixed costs, the fixed component of
mixed costs, and variable cost per unit. Cost equations can use past data to determine patterns of past costs
that can then project future costs, or they can use estimated or expected future data to estimate future costs.
Recall the mixed cost equation:

where Y is the total mixed cost, a is the fixed cost, b is the variable cost per unit, and x is the level of activity.

Let's take a more in-depth look at the cost equation by examining the costs incurred by Eagle Electronics in the
manufacture of home security systems, as shown in Table 2.9.

                                  Cost Information for Eagle Electronics

                   Cost Incurred                    Fixed or Variable                  Cost
                                                                          $50,000 per year
Lease on manufacturing equipment                    Fixed                 $75,000 per year
                                                                          $50 per unit
Supervisor salary                                   Fixed                 $20 per unit

Direct materials                                    Variable

Direct labor                                        Variable

Table 2.9

By applying the cost equation, Eagle Electronics can predict its costs at any level of activity (x) as follows:

 1. Determine total fixed costs: $50,000 + $75,000 = $125,000
 2. Determine variable costs per unit: $50 + $20 = $70
 3. Complete the cost equation: Y = $125,000 + $70x

Using this equation, Eagle Electronics can now predict its total costs (Y) for any given level of activity (x), as in
Figure 2.27:

Figure 2.27 Total Cost Estimation for Various Production Levels. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

When using this approach, Eagle Electronics must be certain that it is only predicting costs for its relevant
range. For example, if they must hire a second supervisor in order to produce 12,000 units, they must go back
and adjust the total fixed costs used in the equation. Likewise, if variable costs per unit change, these must
also be adjusted.
This same approach can be used to predict costs for service and merchandising firms, as shown by examining
102                                                      Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

the costs incurred by J&L Accounting to prepare a corporate income tax return, shown in Table 2.10.

                               Cost Information for J&L Accounting

                Cost Incurred         Fixed or Variable             Cost
Building rent
Direct labor (for CPAs)        Fixed                                $1,000 per month
Secretarial staff
Accounting clerks              Variable                             $250 per tax return

                               Fixed                                $2,000 per month

                               Variable                             $100 per return

Table 2.10

J&L wants to predict their total costs if they complete 25 corporate tax returns in the month of February.

 1. Determine total fixed costs: $1,000 + $2,000 = $3,000
 2. Determine variable costs per tax return: $250 + $100 = $350
 3. Complete the cost equation: Y = $3,000 + $350x

Using this equation, J&L can now predict its total costs (Y) for the month of February when they anticipate
preparing 25 corporate tax returns:

                                                      Y = $3,000 + ($350 × 25)
                                                      Y = $3,000 + $8,750
                                                      Y = $11,750

J&L can now use this predicted total cost figure of $11,750 to make decisions regarding how much to charge
clients or how much cash they need to cover expenses. Again, J&L must be careful to try not to predict costs
outside of the relevant range without adjusting the corresponding total cost components.

J&L can make predictions for their costs because they have the data they need, but what happens when a
business wants to estimate total costs but has not collected data regarding per-unit costs? This is the case for
the managers at the Beach Inn, a small hotel on the coast of South Carolina. They know what their costs were
for June, but now they want to predict their costs for July. They have gathered the information in Figure 2.28.

Figure 2.28 Monthly Total Cost Detail for Beach Inn. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under
CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
In June, they had an occupancy of 75 nights. For the Beach Inn, occupancy (rooms rented) is the cost driver.
Since they know what is driving their costs, they can determine their per-unit variable costs in order to forecast

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting                                                         103

future costs:

               Front Desk Staff = $3,800 = $50.67 variable front desk staff co ts per night
               75 nights                            75

               Cleaning Staff = $2,500 = $33.33 variable cleaning staff co ts per night
               75 nights                            75

               Laundry Service = $1,200 = $16.00 variable laundry service costs per night
               75 nights                            75

Now, the Beach Inn can apply the cost equation in order to forecast total costs for any number of nights,
within the relevant range.

1. Determine total fixed costs: $700 + $2,500 = $3,200
2. Determine variable costs per night of occupancy: $50.67 + $33.33 + $16.00 = $100
3. Complete the cost equation: Y = $3,200 + $100x

Using this equation, the Beach Inn can now predict its total costs (Y) for the month of July, when they
anticipate an occupancy of 93 nights.

                                                      Y = $3,200 + ($100 × 93)
                                                      Y = $3,200 + $9,300
                                                      Y = $12,500

In all three examples, managers used cost data they have collected to forecast future costs at various activity
levels.
104                                                                               Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

     YOUR TURN

     Waymaker Furniture

     Waymaker Furniture has collected cost information from its production process and now wants to predict
     costs for various levels of activity. They plan to use the cost equation to formulate these predictions.
     Information gathered from March is presented in Table 2.11.

                              March Cost Information for Waymaker Furniture

            Cost Incurred       Fixed or Variable                                         March Cost

     Plant supervisor salary    Fixed                                             $12,000 per month

     Lumber (direct materials)  Variable                                          $75,000 total

     Production worker wages    Variable                                          $11.00 per hour

     Machine maintenance        Variable                                          $5.00 per unit produced

     Lease on factory           Fixed                                             $15,000 per month

     Table 2.11

     In March, Waymaker produced 1,000 units and used 2,000 hours of production labor.
     Using this information and the cost equation, predict Waymaker's total costs for the levels of production
     in Table 2.12.

            Month               Waymaker's Levels of Production
                                                                          Activity Level
     April
     May                                1,500 units
     June                               2,000 units
                                        2,500 units

     Table 2.12

     Solution
     Total Fixed Cost = $12,000 + $15,000 = $27,000. Direct Materials per Unit = $75,000 / 1,000 Units = $75 per
     unit. Direct Labor per Hour = $11.00. Machine Maintenance = $5.00 per unit. Total Variable Cost per Unit =
     $75 + $11 + $5 = $91 per unit.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting  105

Demonstration of the Scatter Graph Method to Calculate Future Costs at Varying
Activity Levels

One of the assumptions that managers must make in order to use the cost equation is that the relationship
between activity and costs is linear. In other words, costs rise in direct proportion to activity. A diagnostic tool
that is used to verify this assumption is a scatter graph.
A scatter graph shows plots of points that represent actual costs incurred for various levels of activity. Once
the scatter graph is constructed, we draw a line (often referred to as a trend line) that appears to best fit the
pattern of dots. Because the trend line is somewhat subjective, the scatter graph is often used as a preliminary
tool to explore the possibility that the relationship between cost and activity is generally a linear relationship.
When interpreting a scatter graph, it is important to remember that different people would likely draw
different lines, which would lead to different estimations of fixed and variable costs. No one person's line and
cost estimates would necessarily be right or wrong compared to another; they would just be different. After
using a scatter graph to determine whether cost and activity have a linear relationship, managers often move
on to more precise processes for cost estimation, such as the high-low method or least-squares regression
analysis.
To demonstrate how a company would use a scatter graph, let's turn to the data for Regent Airlines, which
operates a fleet of regional jets serving the northeast United States. The Federal Aviation Administration
establishes guidelines for routine aircraft maintenance based upon the number of flight hours. As a result,
Regent finds that its maintenance costs vary from month to month with the number of flight hours, as
depicted in Figure 2.29.

Figure 2.29 Monthly Maintenance Cost and Activity Detail for Regent Airlines. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

When creating the scatter graph, each point will represent a pair of activity and cost values. Maintenance costs
are plotted on the vertical axis (Y), while flight hours are plotted on the horizontal axis (X). For instance, one
point will represent 21,000 hours and $84,000 in costs. The next point on the graph will represent 23,000 hours
and $90,000 in costs, and so forth, until all of the pairs of data have been plotted. Finally, a trend line is added
106                                                                               Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

to the chart in order to assist managers in seeing if there is a positive, negative, or zero relationship between
the activity level and cost. Figure 2.30 shows a scatter graph for Regent Airlines.

Figure 2.30 Scatter Graph of Maintenance Costs for Regent Airline. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

In scatter graphs, cost is considered the dependent variable because cost depends upon the level of activity.
The activity is considered the independent variable since it is the cause of the variation in costs. Regent's
scatter graph shows a positive relationship between flight hours and maintenance costs because, as flight
hours increase, maintenance costs also increase. This is referred to as a positive linear relationship or a linear
cost behavior.

Will all cost and activity relationships be linear? Only when there is a relationship between the activity and that
particular cost. What if, instead, the cost of snow removal for the runways is plotted against flight hours?
Suppose the snow removal costs are as listed in Table 2.13.

         Month                                  Snow Removal Costs                          Snow Removal Costs
  January                    Activity Level: Flight Hours                         $40,000
  February      21,000                                                            50,000
  March         23,000                                                            8,000
  April         14,000                                                            0
  May           17,000                                                            0
  June          10,000                                                            0
                19,000
Table 2.13

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting  107

Figure 2.31 Scatter Graph of Snow Removal Costs for Regent Airlines. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

As you can see from the scatter graph, there is really not a linear relationship between how many flight hours
are flown and the costs of snow removal. This makes sense as snow removal costs are linked to the amount of
snow and the number of flights taking off and landing but not to how many hours the planes fly.

Using a scatter graph to determine if this linear relationship exists is an essential first step in cost behavior
analysis. If the scatter graph reveals a linear cost behavior, then managers can proceed with a more
sophisticated analyses to separate mixed costs into their fixed and variable components. However, if this linear
relationship is not present, then other methods of analysis are not appropriate. Let's examine the cost data
from Regent Airline using the high-low method.

Demonstration of the High-Low Method to Calculate Future Costs at Varying Activity
Levels

As you've learned, the purpose of identifying costs is to control them, and managers regularly use past costs
to predict future costs. Since we know that variable costs change with the level of activity, we can conclude that
there is usually a positive relationship between cost and activity: As one rises, so does the other. Ideally, this
can be confirmed on a scatter graph. One of the simplest ways to analyze costs is to use the high-low
method, a technique for separating the fixed and variable cost components of mixed costs. Using the highest
and lowest levels of activity and their associated costs, we are able to estimate the variable cost components of
mixed costs.

Once we have established that there is linear cost behavior, we can equate variable costs with the slope of the
line, expressed as the rise of the line over the run. The steeper the slope of the line, the faster costs rise in
response to a change in activity. Recall from the scatter graph that costs are the dependent Y variable and
activity is the independent X variable. By examining the change in Y relative to the change in X, we can predict
cost:
108  Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

where Y2 is the total cost at the highest level of activity; Y1 is the total cost at the lowest level of activity; X2 is
the number of units, labor hours, etc., at the highest level of activity; and X1 is the number of units, labor
hours, etc., at the lowest level of activity.

Using the maintenance cost data from Regent Airlines shown in Figure 2.32, we will examine how this method
works in practice.

Figure 2.32 Monthly Maintenance Cost and Activity Detail for Regent Airlines. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

The first step in analyzing mixed costs with the high-low method is to identify the periods with the highest and
lowest levels of activity. In this case, it would be February and May, as shown in Figure 2.33. We always choose
the highest and lowest activity and the costs that correspond with those levels of activity, even if they are not
the highest and lowest costs.

Figure 2.33 High-Low Data Points for Regent Airlines Maintenance Costs. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

We are now able to estimate the variable costs by dividing the difference between the costs of the high and
the low periods by the change in activity using this formula:

For Regent Airlines, this is:
                                  Variable Cost = $90,000 - $64,500 = $1.96 per flight hou
                                                        23,000 - 10,000

Having determined that the variable cost per flight-hour is $1.96, we can now determine the amount of fixed
costs. We can determine these fixed costs by taking the total costs at either the high or the low level of activity
and subtracting this variable component. You will recall that total cost = fixed costs + variable costs, so the
fixed cost component for Regent Airlines can be isolated as shown:

                                              Fixed cost = total cost - variable cost
                                              Fixed cost = $90,000 - 23,000 × $1.96
                                              Fixed cost = $44,920

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting  109

Notice that if we had chosen the other data point, the low cost and activity, we would still get the same fixed
cost of $44,920 = [$64,500 - (10,000 × $1.96)].

Now that we have isolated both the fixed and the variable components, we can express Regent Airlines' cost of
maintenance using the total cost equation:

                                                         Y = $44,920 + $1.96x

where Y is total cost and x is flight hours.

Because we confirmed that the relationship between cost and activity at Regent exhibits linear cost behavior
on the scatter graph, this equation allows managers at Regent Airlines to conclude that for every one unit
increase in activity, there will be a corresponding rise in variable cost of $1.96. When put into practice, the
managers at Regent Airlines can now predict their total costs at any level of activity, as shown in Figure 2.34.

Figure 2.34 Predictions of Total Cost and Cost Components at Different Levels of Activity for Regent Airlines.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Although managers frequently use this method, it is not the most accurate approach to predicting future costs
because it is based on only two pieces of cost data: the highest and the lowest levels of activity. Actual costs
can vary significantly from these estimates, especially when the high or low activity levels are not
representative of the usual level of activity within the business. For a more accurate model, the least-squares
regression method would be used to separate mixed costs into their fixed and variable components. The least-
squares regression method is a statistical technique that may be used to estimate the total cost at the given
level of activity based on past cost data. Least-squares regression minimizes the errors of trying to fit a line
between the data points and thus fits the line more closely to all the data points.

Understanding the various labels used for costs is the first step toward using costs to evaluate business
decisions. You will learn more about these various labels and how they are applied in decision-making
processes as you continue your study of managerial accounting in this course.
110                                                                               Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

     Key Terms

average fixed cost (AFC) total fixed costs divided by the total number of units produced, which results in a
     per-unit cost

average variable cost (AVC) total variable costs divided by the total number of units produced, which
     results in a per-unit cost

conversion costs total of labor and overhead for a product; the costs that "convert" the direct material into
     the finished product

cost driver activity that is the reason for the increase or decrease of another cost; examples include labor
     hours incurred, labor costs paid, amounts of materials used in production, units produced, or any other
     activity that has a cause-and-effect relationship with incurred costs

direct labor labor directly related to the manufacturing of the product or the production of a service
direct materials materials used in the manufacturing process that can be traced directly to the product
fixed cost unavoidable operating expense that does not change in total, regardless of the level of activity
high-low method technique for separating the fixed and variable cost components of mixed costs
indirect labor labor not directly involved in the active conversion of materials into finished products or the

     provision of services
indirect materials materials used in production but not efficiently traceable to a specific unit of production
intangible good good with financial value but no physical presence; examples include copyrights, patents,

     goodwill, and trademarks
manufacturing organization business that uses parts, components, or raw materials to produce finished

     goods
manufacturing overhead costs incurred in the production process that are not economically feasible to

     measure as direct material or direct labor costs; examples include indirect material, indirect labor, utilities,
     and depreciation
merchandising firm business that purchases finished products and resells them to consumers
mixed costs expenses that have a fixed component and a variable component
period costs typically related to a particular time period instead of attached to the production of an asset;
     treated as an expense in the period incurred (examples include many sales and administrative expenses)
prime costs direct material expenses and direct labor costs
product costs all expenses required to manufacture the product: direct materials, direct labor, and
     manufacturing overhead
relevant range quantitative range of units that can be produced based on the company's current productive
     assets; for example, if a company has sufficient fixed assets to produce up to 10,000 units of product, the
     relevant range would be between 0 and 10,000 units
scatter graph plot of pairs of numerical data that represents actual costs incurred for various levels of
     activity, with one variable on each axis, used to determine whether there is a relationship between them
service organization business that earns revenue primarily by providing an intangible product
stepped cost one that changes with the level of activity but will remain constant within a relevant range
tangible good physical good that customers can handle and see
total cost sum of all fixed and all variable costs
total fixed costs sum of all fixed costs
total variable costs sum of all variable costs
variable cost one that varies in direct proportion to the level of activity within the business

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting  111

     Summary

2.1 Distinguish between Merchandising, Manufacturing, and Service Organizations
  · Merchandising, manufacturing, and service organizations differ in what they provide to consumers;
      however, all three types of firms must control costs in order to remain profitable. The type of costs they
      incur is primarily determined by the product/good, or service they provide.
  · As the type of organization differs, so does the way they account for costs. Some of these differences are
      reflected in the income statement.

2.2 Identify and Apply Basic Cost Behavior Patterns
  · Costs can be broadly classified as either fixed or variable costs. However, in order for managers to
      manage effectively, these two cost classifications are often further expanded to include mixed, step,
      prime, and conversion costs.
  · For manufacturing firms, it is essential that they differentiate among direct materials, direct labor, and
      manufacturing overhead in order to identify and manage their total product costs.
  · For planning purposes, managers must be careful to consider the relevant range because it is only within
      this relevant range that total fixed costs remain constant.

2.3 Estimate a Variable and Fixed Cost Equation and Predict Future Costs
  · In order to make business decisions, managers can utilize past cost data to predict future costs employing
      three methods: scatter graphs, the high-low method, and least-squares regression analysis.
  · Scatter graphs are used as a diagnostic tool to determine if the relationship between activity and cost is a
      linear relationship.
  · Both the high-low method and the least-squares regression method separate mixed costs into their fixed
      and variable components to allow managers to predict future costs from historical costs.

     Multiple Choice

1. 2.1 Which of the following is the primary source of revenue for a service business?
    A. the production of products from raw materials
    B. the purchase and resale of finished products
    C. providing intangible goods and services
    D. the sale of raw materials to manufacturing firms

2. 2.1 Which of the following is the primary source of revenue for a merchandising business?
    A. the production of products from raw materials
    B. the purchase and resale of finished products
    C. the provision of intangible goods and services
    D. the sale of raw materials to manufacturing firms

3. 2.1 Which of the following is the primary source of revenue for a manufacturing business?
    A. the production of products from raw materials
    B. the purchase and resale of finished products
    C. the provision of intangible goods and services
    D. both the provision of services and the sale of finished goods
112                                                                               Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

4. 2.1 Which of the following represents the components of the income statement for a service business?
    A. Sales Revenue - Cost of Goods Sold = gross profit
    B. Service Revenue - Operating Expenses = operating income
    C. Sales Revenue - Cost of Goods Manufactured = gross profit
    D. Service Revenue - Cost of Goods Purchased = gross profit

5. 2.1 Which of the following represents the components of the income statement for a manufacturing
business?

    A. Sales Revenue - Cost of Goods Sold = gross profit
    B. Service Revenue - Operating Expenses = gross profit
    C. Service Revenue - Cost of Goods Manufactured = gross profit
    D. Sales Revenue - Cost of Goods Manufactured = gross profit

6. 2.1 Which of the following represents the components of the income statement for a merchandising
business?

    A. Sales Revenue - Cost of Goods Sold = gross profit
    B. Service Revenue - Operating Expenses = gross profit
    C. Sales Revenue - Cost of Goods Manufactured = gross profit
    D. Service Revenue - Cost of Goods Purchased = gross profit

7. 2.2 Conversion costs include all of the following except:
    A. wages of production workers
    B. depreciation on factory equipment
    C. factory utilities
    D. direct materials purchased

8. 2.2 Which of the following is not considered a product cost?
    A. direct materials
    B. direct labor
    C. indirect materials
    D. selling expense

9. 2.2 Fixed costs are expenses that ________.
    A. vary in response to changes in activity level
    B. remain constant on a per-unit basis
    C. increase on a per-unit basis as activity increases
    D. remain constant as activity changes

10.     2.2 Variable costs are expenses that ________.
    A.  remain constant on a per-unit basis but change in total based on activity level
    B.  remain constant on a per-unit basis and remain constant in total regardless of activity level
    C.  decrease on a per-unit basis as activity level increases
    D.  remain constant in total regardless of activity level within a relevant range

11. 2.2 Total costs for ABC Distributing are $250,000 when the activity level is 10,000 units. If variable costs
are $5 per unit, what are their fixed costs?

    A. $240,000
    B. $200,000
    C. $260,000
    D. Their fixed costs cannot be determined from the information presented.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting                                              113

12.     2.2 Which of the following would not be classified as manufacturing overhead?
    A.  indirect materials
    B.  indirect labor
    C.  direct labor
    D.  property taxes on factory

13.     2.2 Which of the following are prime costs?
    A.  indirect materials, indirect labor, and direct labor
    B.  direct labor, indirect materials, and indirect labor
    C.  direct labor and indirect labor
    D.  direct labor and direct materials

14.     2.2 Which of the following statements is true regarding average fixed costs?
    A.  Average fixed costs per unit remain fixed regardless of level of activity.
    B.  Average fixed costs per unit rise as the level of activity rises.
    C.  Average fixed costs per unit fall as the level of activity rises.
    D.  Average fixed costs per unit cannot be determined.

15.     2.3 The high-low method and least-squares regression are used by managers to ________.
    A.  decide whether to make or buy a component part
    B.  minimize corporate tax liability
    C.  maximize output
    D.  estimate costs

16.     2.3 Which of the following methods of cost estimation relies on only two data points?
    A.  the high-low method
    B.  account analysis
    C.  least-squares regression
    D.  SWOT analysis.

17.     2.3 In the cost equation Y = a + bx, Y represents which of the following?
    A.  fixed costs
    B.  variable costs
    C.  total costs
    D.  units of production

18. 2.3 A scatter graph is used to test the assumption that the relationship between cost and activity level is
________.

    A. curvilinear
    B. cyclical
    C. unpredictable
    D. linear

     Questions

1. 2.1 Identify the three primary classifications of businesses and explain the differences among the three.
2. 2.1 Explain how the income statement of a manufacturing company differs from the income statement
of a merchandising company.
114                                                                               Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

3. 2.1 Walsh & Coggins, a professional accounting firm, collects cost information about the services they
provide to their clients. Describe the types of cost data they would collect and explain the importance of
analyzing this cost data.

4. 2.1 Lizzy's is a retail clothing store, specializing in formal wear for weddings. They purchase their clothing
for resale from specialty distributors and manufacturers. Recently the owners of Lizzy's have noted an
increased interest in costume jewelry and fashion accessories among their clientele. If the owners of Lizzy's
decide to expand their business to include these products, what cost data would they need to collect and
analyze prior to expanding the business?

5. 2.2 Identify and describe the three types of product costs in a manufacturing firm.

6. 2.2 Explain the difference between a period cost and a product cost.

7. 2.2 Explain the concept of relevant range and how it affects total fixed costs.

8. 2.2 Explain the differences among fixed costs, variable costs, and mixed costs.

9. 2.2 Explain the difference between prime costs and conversion costs.

10. 2.3 Explain how a scatter graph is used to identify and measure cost behavior.

11. 2.3 Explain the components of the total cost equation and describe how each of the components can be
used by management for decision-making.

12. 2.3 Explain how the high-low method is used for cost estimation. What, if any, are the limitations of this
approach to cost estimation?

     Exercise Set A

EA1. 2.1 Magio Company manufactures kitchen equipment used in hospitals. They distribute their products
directly to the customer and, for the year ending 2019, they reported the these revenues and expenses. Use
this information to construct an income statement for the year 2019.

EA2. 2.1 Park and West, LLC, provides consulting services to retail merchandisers in the Midwest. In 2019,
they generated $720,000 in service revenue. Their total cost (fixed and variable) per client was $2,500 and they
served 115 clients during the year. If operating expenses for the year were $302,000 what was their net
income?

EA3. 2.1 Canine Couture is a specialty dog clothing boutique that sells clothing and clothing accessories for
dogs. In 2019, they had gross revenue from sales totaling $86,500. Their operating expenses for this same
period were $27,500. If their Cost of Goods Sold (COGS) was 24% of gross revenue, what was their net
operating income for the year?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting  115

EA4. 2.2 Hicks Contracting collects and analyzes cost data in order to track the cost of installing decks on
new home construction jobs. The following are some of the costs that they incur. Classify these costs as fixed
or variable costs and as product or period costs.

    A. Lumber used to construct decks ($12.00 per square foot)
    B. Carpenter labor used to construct decks ($10 per hour)
    C. Construction supervisor salary ($45,000 per year)
    D. Depreciation on tools and equipment ($6,000 per year)
    E. Selling and administrative expenses ($35,000 per year)
    F. Rent on corporate office space ($34,000 per year)
    G. Nails, glue, and other materials required to construct deck (varies per job)

EA5. 2.2 Rose Company has a relevant range of production between 10,000 and 25,000 units. The following
cost data represents average cost per unit for 15,000 units of production.

Using the cost data from Rose Company, answer the following questions:

    A. If 10,000 units are produced, what is the variable cost per unit?
    B. If 18,000 units are produced, what is the variable cost per unit?
    C. If 21,000 units are produced, what are the total variable costs?
    D. If 11,000 units are produced, what are the total variable costs?
    E. If 19,000 units are produced, what are the total manufacturing overhead costs incurred?
    F. If 23,000 units are produced, what are the total manufacturing overhead costs incurred?
    G. If 19,000 units are produced, what are the per unit manufacturing overhead costs incurred?
    H. If 25,000 units are produced, what are the per unit manufacturing overhead costs incurred?

EA6. 2.2 Carr Company provides human resource consulting services to small- and medium-sized
companies. Last year, Carr provided services to 700 clients. Total fixed costs were $159,000 with total variable
costs of $87,500. Based on this information, complete this chart:
116                                                                               Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

EA7. 2.2 Western Trucking operates a fleet of delivery trucks. The fixed expenses to operate the fleet are
$79,900 in March and rose to $93,120 in April. It costs Western Trucking $0.15 per mile in variable costs. In
March, the delivery trucks were driven a total of 85,000 miles, and in April, they were driven a total of 96,000
miles. Using this information, answer the following:

    A. What were the total costs to operate the fleet in March and April, respectively?
    B. What were the cost per mile to operate the fleet in March and April, respectively?

EA8. 2.2 Suppose that a company has fixed costs of $18 per unit and variable costs $9 per unit when 15,000
units are produced. What are the fixed costs per unit when 12,000 units are produced?

EA9. 2.3 The cost data for Evencoat Paint for the year 2019 is as follows:

     A. Using the high-low method, express the company's maintenance costs as an equation where x
           represents the gallons of paint produced. Then estimate the fixed and variable costs.

     B. Predict the maintenance costs if 90,000 gallons of paint are produced.
     C. Predict the maintenance costs if 81,000 gallons of paint are produced.
     D. Using Excel, create a scatter graph of the cost data and explain the relationship between gallons of

           paint produced and equipment maintenance expenses.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting                     117

EA10. 2.3 This cost data from Hickory Furniture is for the year 2017.

    A. Using the high-low method, express the company's utility costs as an equation where X represents
          number of tables produced.

    B. Predict the utility costs if 800 tables are produced.
    C. Predict the utility costs if 600 tables are produced.
    D. Using Excel, create a scatter graph of the cost data and explain the relationship between number of

          tables produced and utility expenses.
EA11. 2.3 Markson and Sons leases a copy machine with terms that include a fixed fee each month plus a
charge for each copy made. Markson made 9,000 copies and paid a total of $480 in January. In April, they paid
$320 for 5,000 copies. What is the variable cost per copy if Markson uses the high-low method to analyze
costs?
EA12. 2.3 Markson and Sons leases a copy machine with terms that include a fixed fee each month of $500
plus a charge for each copy made. The company uses the high-low method to analyze costs. If Markson paid
$360 for 5,000 copies and $280 for 3,000 copies, how much would Markson pay if it made 7,500 copies?

  B Exercise Set B

EB1. 2.1 Winterfell Products manufactures electrical switches for the aerospace industry. For the year
ending 2019, they reported these revenues and expenses. Use this information to construct an income
statement for the year 2019.

EB2. 2.1 CPK & Associates is a mid-size legal firm, specializing in closings and real estate law in the south. In
2019, they generated $945,000 in sales revenue. Their expenses related to this year's revenue are shown:

Based on the information provided for the year, what was their net operating income?
118                                                                               Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

EB3. 2.1 Flip or Flop is a retail shop selling a wide variety of sandals and beach footwear. In 2019, they had
gross revenue from sales totaling $93,200. Their operating expenses for this same period were $34,000. If their
Cost of Goods Sold (COGS) was 21% of gross revenue, what was their net operating income for the year?

EB4. Roper Furniture manufactures office furniture and tracks cost data across their process. The following are
some of the costs that they incur. Classify these costs as fixed or variable costs, and as product costs or period
costs.

    A. Wood used to produce desks ($125.00 per desk)
    B. Production labor used to produce desks ($15 per hour)
    C. Production supervisor salary ($45,000 per year)
    D. Depreciation on factory equipment ($60,000 per year)
    E. Selling and administrative expenses ($45,000 per year)
    F. Rent on corporate office ($44,000 per year)
    G. Nails, glue, and other materials required to produce desks (varies per desk)
    H. Utilities expenses for production facility
    I. Sales staff commission (5% of gross sales)

EB5. 2.2 Baxter Company has a relevant range of production between 15,000 and 30,000 units. The
following cost data represents average variable costs per unit for 25,000 units of production.

Using the costs data from Rose Company, answer the following questions:

    A. If 15,000 units are produced, what is the variable cost per unit?
    B. If 28,000 units are produced, what is the variable cost per unit?
    C. If 21,000 units are produced, what are the total variable costs?
    D. If 29,000 units are produced, what are the total variable costs?
    E. If 17,000 units are produced, what are the total manufacturing overhead costs incurred?
    F. If 23,000 units are produced, what are the total manufacturing overhead costs incurred?
    G. If 30,000 units are produced, what are the per unit manufacturing overhead costs incurred?
    H. If 15,000 units are produced, what are the per unit manufacturing overhead costs incurred?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting                                                               119

EB6. 2.2 Sanchez & Vukmin, LLP, is a full-service accounting firm located near Chicago, Illinois.

Last year, Sanchez provided tax preparation services to 500 clients. Total fixed costs were $265,000 with total
variable costs of $180,000. Based on this information, complete this chart.

EB7. 2.2 Case Airlines provides charter airline services. The fixed expenses to operate the company's
aircraft are $377,300 in January and $378,880 in February. It costs Case Airlines $0.45 per mile in variable costs.
In January, Case aircraft flew a total of 385,000 miles, and in February, Case aircraft flew a total of 296,000
miles. Using this information, answer the following:

    A. What were the total costs to operate the aircraft in January and February, respectively?
    B. What were the total costs per mile to operate the fleet in January and February, respectively?

EB8. 2.2 Suppose that a company has fixed costs of $11 per unit and variable costs $6 per unit when 11,000
units are produced. What are the fixed costs per unit when 20,000 units are produced?

EB9. 2.3 The cost data for BC Billing Solutions for the year 2020 is as follows:

A. Using the high-low method, express the company's overtime wages as an equation where x represents
      number of invoices processed. Assume BC has monthly fixed costs of $3,800.

B. Predict the overtime wages if 9,000 invoices are processed.
C. Predict the overtime wages if 6,500 invoices are processed.
D. Using Excel, create a scatter graph of the cost data and explain the relationship between the number of

      invoices processed and overtime wage expense.
120                                                                    Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

EB10. 2.3 This cost data from Hickory Furniture is for the year 2017.

    A. Using the high-low method, express the factory utility expenses as an equation where x represents
          number of chairs produced.

    B. Predict the utility costs if 900 chairs are produced.
    C. Predict the utility costs if 750 chairs are produced.
    D. Using Excel, create a scatter graph of the cost data and explain the relationship between number of

          chairs processed and utility expenses.
EB11. 2.3 Able Transport operates a tour bus that they lease with terms that involve a fixed fee each month
plus a charge for each mile driven. Able Transport drove the tour bus 4,000 miles and paid a total of $1,250 in
March. In April, they paid $970 for 3,000 miles. What is the variable cost per mile if Able Transport uses the
high-low method to analyze costs?
EB12. 2.3 Able Transport operates a tour bus that they lease with terms that involve a fixed fee each month
plus a charge for each mile driven. Able Transport drove the bus 7,000 miles and paid a total of $1,360 in June.
In October, Able Transport paid $1,280 for the 5,000 miles driven. If Able Transport uses the high-low method
to analyze costs, how much would Able Transport pay in December, if they drove 6,000 miles?

     Problem Set A

PA1. 2.1 Ballentine Manufacturing produces and sells lawnmowers through a national dealership network.
They purchase raw materials from a variety of suppliers, and all manufacturing and assembly work is
performed at their plant outside of Kansas City, Missouri. They recorded these costs for the year ending
December 31, 2017. Construct an income statement for Ballentine Manufacturing to reflect their net income
for 2017.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting                                                           121

PA2. 2.1 Tom West is a land surveyor who operates a small surveying company, performing surveys for
both residential and commercial clients. He has a staff of surveyors and engineers who are employed by the
firm. For the year ending December 31, 2017, he reported these income and expenses. Using this information,
construct an income statement to reflect his net income for 2017.

PA3. 2.1 Just Beachy is a retail business located on the coast of Florida where it sells a variety of beach
apparel, T-shirts, and beach-related souvenir items. They purchase all of their inventory from wholesalers and
distributors. For the year ending December 31, 2017, they reported these revenues and expenses. Using this
information, prepare an income statement for Just Beachy for 2017.

PA4. 2.2 Listed as follows are various costs found in businesses. Classify each cost as a fixed or variable
cost, and as a product and/or period cost.

    A. Wages of administrative staff
    B. Shipping costs on merchandise sold
    C. Wages of workers assembling computers
    D. Cost of lease on factory equipment
    E. Insurance on factory
    F. Direct materials used in production of lamps
    G. Supervisor salary, factory
    H. Advertising costs
    I. Property taxes, factory
    J. Health insurance cost for company executives
    K. Rent on factory
122  Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

PA5. 2.2 Wachowski Company reported these cost data for the year 2017.

Use the data to complete the following table.

  Total prime costs
  Total manufacturing overhead costs
  Total conversion costs
  Total product costs
  Total period costs

PA6. 2.3 Carolina Yachts builds custom yachts in its production factory in South Carolina. Once complete,
these yachts must be shipped to the dealership. They have collected this shipping cost data:

    A. Prepare a scatter graph of the shipping data. Plot cost on the vertical axis and yachts shipped on the
          horizontal axis. Is the relationship between shipping costs and unit shipped approximately linear?
          Draw a straight line through the scatter graph.

    B. Using the high-low method, create the cost formula for Carolina Yachts' shipping costs.
    C. The least-squares regression method was used and the analysis resulted in this cost equation: Y = 4,000

          + 1,275x. Comment on the accuracy of your high-low method estimation.
    D. What would you estimate shipping costs to be if Carolina Yachts shipped 10 yachts in a single month?

          Use the cost formula you obtained in part B. Comment on how accurately this is reflected by the scatter
          graph you constructed.
    E. What factors other than number of yachts shipped do you think could affect Carolina Yachts' shipping
          expense? Explain.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting                                                            123

  B Problem Set B

PB1. 2.1 Hicks Products produces and sells patio furniture through a national dealership network. They
purchase raw materials from a variety of suppliers and all manufacturing, and assembly work is performed at
their plant outside of Cleveland, Ohio. They recorded these costs for the year ending December 31, 2017.
Construct an income statement for Hicks Products, to reflect their net income for 2017.

PB2. 2.1 Conner & Scheer, Attorneys at Law, provide a wide range of legal services for their clients. They
employ several paralegal and administrative support staff in order to provide high-quality legal services at
competitive prices. For the year ending December 31, 2017, the firm reported these income and expenses.
Using this information, construct an income statement to reflect the firm's net income for 2017.

PB3. 2.1 Puzzles, Pranks & Games is a retail business selling children's toys and games as well as a wide
selection of jigsaw puzzles and accessories. They purchase their inventory from local and national wholesale
suppliers. For the year ending December 31, 2017, they reported these revenues and expenses. Using this
information, prepare an income statement for Puzzles, Pranks & Games for 2017.
124  Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

PB4. 2.2 Pocket Umbrella, Inc, is considering producing a new type of umbrella. This new pocket-sized
umbrella would fit into a coat pocket or purse. Classify the following costs of this new product as direct
materials, direct labor, manufacturing overhead, or selling and administrative.[6]

    A. Cost of advertising the product
    B. Fabric used to make the umbrellas
    C. Maintenance of cutting machines used to cut the umbrella fabric so it will fit the umbrella frame
    D. Wages of workers who assemble the product
    E. President's salary
    F. The salary of the supervisor of the people who assemble the product
    G. Wages of the product tester who stands in a shower to make sure the umbrellas do not leak
    H. Cost of market research survey
    I. Salary of the company's sales managers
    J. Depreciation of administrative office building

PB5. Using the costs listed in the previous problem, classify the costs as either product costs or period costs.

PB6. 2.3 Gadell Farms produces venison sausage that is distributed to grocery stores throughout the
Southeast. They have collected this shipping cost data:

     A. Prepare a scatter graph of the shipping data. Plot cost on the vertical axis and tons produced on the
           horizontal axis. Is the relationship between packaging costs and tons produced approximately linear?
           Draw a straight line through the scatter graph.

     B. Using the high-low method, estimate the cost formula for Gadell Farms' packaging costs.
     C. The least-squares regression method was used and the analysis resulted in this cost equation: Y = 1650

           + 78.57x. Comment on the accuracy of your high-low method estimation.
     D. What would you estimate packaging costs to be if Gadell Farms shipped 10 tons in a single month? Use

           the cost formula you obtained in part B. Comment on how accurately this is reflected by the scatter
           graph you constructed.
     E. What factors other than number of tons produced do you think could affect Gadell Farm's packaging
           expense? Explain.

6 Attribution: Modification of work by Roger Hermanson, James Edwards, and Michael Maher. Accounting Principles: A Business Perspective.
2011, CC BY. Source: Available at https://open.umn.edu/opentextbooks/textbooks/383.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting                                                                                        125

     Thought Provokers

TP1. 2.1 In a team of two or three students, interview the manager/owner of a local business. In this
interview, ask the manager/owner the following questions:

    A. Does the business collect and use cost information to make decisions?
    B. Does it have a specialist in cost estimation who works with this cost data? If not, who is responsible for

          the collection of cost information? Be as specific as possible.
    C. What type of cost information does the business collect and how is each type of information used?
    D. How important does the owner/manager believe cost information is to the success of the business?

Then, write a report to the instructor summarizing the results of the interview.

Content of the memo must include

      · date of the interview,
      · the name and title of the person interviewed,
      · name and location of the business,
      · type of business (service, merchandising, manufacturing) and brief description of the goods/services

          provided by the business, and
      · responses to questions A-D.

TP2. 2.2 This list contains costs that various organizations incur; they fall into three categories: direct
materials (DM), direct labor (DL), or overhead (OH).[7]

    A. Classify each of these items as direct materials, direct labor, or overhead.
                 i. Glue used to attach labels to bottles containing a patented medicine.
                ii. Compressed air used in operating paint sprayers for Student Painters, a company that paints
                     houses and apartments.

               iii. Insurance on a factory building and equipment.
               iv. A production department supervisor's salary.
                v. Rent on factory machinery.
               vi. Iron ore in a steel mill.
              vii. Oil, gasoline, and grease for forklift trucks in a manufacturing company's warehouse.
             viii. Services of painters in building construction.
               ix. Cutting oils used in machining operations.
                x. Cost of paper towels in a factory employees' washroom.
               xi. Payroll taxes and fringe benefits related to direct labor.
              xii. The plant electricians' salaries.
             xiii. Crude oil to an oil refinery.
             xiv. Copy editor's salary in a book publishing company.
    B. Assume your classifications could be challenged in a court case. Indicate to your attorneys which of
          your answers for part a might be successfully disputed by the opposing attorneys and why. In which
          answers are you completely confident?

7 Attribution: Modification of work by Roger Hermanson, James Edwards, and Michael Maher. Accounting Principles: A Business Perspective.
2011, CC BY. Source: Available at https://open.umn.edu/opentextbooks/textbooks/383.
126                                                                               Chapter 2 Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
     3

              Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

Figure 3.1 Balancing Cost, Volume, and Profit. Managers employ cost-volume-profit (CVP) analysis to
determine the sales level at which they break even or balance their revenue with their expenses. (credit:
modification of "Balance Swing Equality" by "Mediamodifier"/Pixabay, CC0)

 Chapter Outline

  3.1 Explain Contribution Margin and Calculate Contribution Margin per Unit, Contribution Margin Ratio,
       and Total Contribution Margin

  3.2 Calculate a Break-Even Point in Units and Dollars
  3.3 Perform Break-Even Sensitivity Analysis for a Single Product Under Changing Business Situations
  3.4 Perform Break-Even Sensitivity Analysis for a Multi-Product Environment Under Changing Business

       Situations
  3.5 Calculate and Interpret a Company's Margin of Safety and Operating Leverage

      Why It Matters

   As president of the Accounting Club, you are working on a fundraiser selling T-shirts on campus. You have
   gotten quotes from several suppliers ranging from $8 to $10 per shirt and now have to select a vendor. The
   prices vary based on whether the T-shirts have pockets, have long sleeves or short sleeves, and are printed on
   one side or both. You are confident that you can sell them for $15 each. However, the college charges clubs a
   $100 "student sale" fee, and your T-shirt sales must cover this cost and still net the club enough money to pay
   for your spring trip
   In addition, several of the vendors will give volume discounts--the more shirts you purchase, the less each
   shirt costs. In short, you need to know exactly which style of T-shirt, vendor, and quantity will allow you to
   reach your desired net income and cover your fixed expense of $100. You decide on a short-sleeve shirt with a
   pocket that costs $10 each and that you can sell for $15.
128  Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

This $5 per shirt "gross profit" will first go toward covering the $100 student sale fee. That means you will have
to sell 20 shirts to pay the fee ($100/$5 = 20 shirts). After selling the first 20 shirts, the $5 profit will be available
to start paying for the cost of the trip. Your faculty advisor has calculated that the trip will cost $125 per
student, and you have 6 people signed up for the trip. This means the sale will need to generate an additional
$750 from the sale (6 students × $125). At $5 per shirt you will need to sell 150 shirts to cover the student costs
($750/$5). So, you will need to sell a total of 170 shirts: 20 to cover your fixed cost of $100 and an additional
150 to cover the student's cost of the trip ($750). What you have just completed is a cost-volume-profit
analysis. In this chapter, we will explore how managers can use this type of analysis to make a wide range of
decisions about their business operations.

 3.1 Explain Contribution Margin and Calculate Contribution Margin per Unit,
Contribution Margin Ratio, and Total Contribution Margin

Before examining contribution margins, let's review some key concepts: fixed costs, relevant range, variable
costs, and contribution margin. Fixed costs are those costs that will not change within a given range of
production. For example, in the current case, the fixed costs will be the student sales fee of $100. No matter
how many shirts the club produces within the relevant range, the fee will be locked in at $100. The relevant
range is the anticipated production activity level. Fixed costs remain constant within a relevant range. If
production levels exceed expectations, then additional fixed costs will be required.

For example, assume that the students are going to lease vans from their university's motor pool to drive to
their conference. A university van will hold eight passengers, at a cost of $200 per van. If they send one to
eight participants, the fixed cost for the van would be $200. If they send nine to sixteen students, the fixed cost
would be $400 because they will need two vans. We would consider the relevant range to be between one and
eight passengers, and the fixed cost in this range would be $200. If they exceed the initial relevant range, the
fixed costs would increase to $400 for nine to sixteen passengers.

Variable costs are those costs that vary per unit of production. Direct materials are often typical variable costs,
because you normally use more direct materials when you produce more items. In our example, if the
students sold 100 shirts, assuming an individual variable cost per shirt of $10, the total variable costs would be
$1,000 (100 × $10). If they sold 250 shirts, again assuming an individual variable cost per shirt of $10, then the
total variable costs would $2,500 (250 × $10).

Contribution margin is the amount by which a product's selling price exceeds its total variable cost per unit.
This difference between the sales price and the per unit variable cost is called the contribution margin because
it is the per unit contribution toward covering the fixed costs. It typically is calculated by comparing the sales
revenue generated by the sale of one item versus the variable cost of the item:

In our example, the sales revenue from one shirt is $15 and the variable cost of one shirt is $10, so the
individual contribution margin is $5. This $5 contribution margin is assumed to first cover fixed costs first and
then realized as profit.
As you will see, it is not just small operations, such as the accounting club scenario provided in Why It Matters,
that benefit from cost-volume-profit (CVP) analysis. At some point, all businesses find themselves asking the
same basic questions: How many units must be sold in order to reach a desired income level? How much will
each unit cost? How much of the sales price from each unit will help cover our fixed costs? For example,
Starbucks faces these same questions every day, only on a larger scale. When they introduce new menu items,
such as seasonal specialty drinks, they must determine the fixed and variable costs associated with each item.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis  129

Adding menu items may not only increase their fixed costs in the short run (via advertising and promotions)
but will bring new variable costs. Starbucks needs to price these drinks in a way that covers the variable costs
per unit and additional fixed costs and contributes to overall net income. Regardless of how large or small the
enterprise, understanding how fixed costs, variable costs, and volume are related to income is vital for sound
decision-making.

Figure 3.2 Starbucks. Large corporations like Starbucks use cost-volume-profit analysis to make decisions
about their products and services to ensure that they are maximizing their revenues. (credit: modification of
"StarbucksVaughanMills" by "Raysonho"/Wikimedia Commons, CC0)

Understanding how to use fixed costs, variable costs, and sales in CVP analyses requires an understanding of
the term margin. You may have heard that restaurants and grocery stores have very low margins, while
jewelry stores and furniture stores have very high margins. What does "margin" mean? In the broadest terms,
margin is the difference between a product or service's selling price and its cost of production. Recall the
accounting club's T-shirt sale. The difference between the sales price per T-shirt and the purchase price of the
T-shirts was the accounting club's margin:

Recall that Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting explained the characteristics of fixed and variable costs
and introduced the basics of cost behavior. Let's now apply these behaviors to the concept of contribution
margin. The company will use this "margin" to cover fixed expenses and hopefully to provide a profit. Let's
begin by examining contribution margin on a per unit basis.

Unit Contribution Margin

When the contribution margin is calculated on a per unit basis, it is referred to as the contribution margin per
unit or unit contribution margin. You can find the contribution margin per unit using the equation shown in
image.

It is important to note that this unit contribution margin can be calculated either in dollars or as a percentage.
130  Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

To demonstrate this principle, let's consider the costs and revenues of Hicks Manufacturing, a small company
that manufactures and sells birdbaths to specialty retailers.

Hicks Manufacturing sells its Blue Jay Model for $1100 and incurs variable costs of $20 per unit. In order to
calculate their per unit contribution margin, we use the formula in image to determine that on a per unit basis,
their contribution margin is:

This means that for every Blue Jay model they sell, they will have $80 to contribute toward covering fixed costs,
such as rent, insurance, and manager salaries. But Hicks Manufacturing manufactures and sells more than
one model of birdbath. They also sell a Cardinal Model for $75, and these birdbaths incur variable costs of $15
per unit. For the Cardinal Model, their contribution margin on a per unit basis is the $75 sales price less the
$15 per unit variable costs is as follows:

This demonstrates that, for every Cardinal model they sell, they will have $60 to contribute toward covering
fixed costs and, if there is any left, toward profit. Every product that a company manufactures or every service
a company provides will have a unique contribution margin per unit. In these examples, the contribution
margin per unit was calculated in dollars per unit, but another way to calculate contribution margin is as a
ratio (percentage).

Contribution Margin Ratio

The contribution margin ratio is the percentage of a unit's selling price that exceeds total unit variable costs.
In other words, contribution margin is expressed as a percentage of sales price and is calculated using this
formula:

For Hicks Manufacturing and their Blue Jay Model, the contribution margin ratio will be

At a contribution margin ratio of 80%, approximately $0.80 of each sales dollar generated by the sale of a Blue
Jay Model is available to cover fixed expenses and contribute to profit. The contribution margin ratio for the
birdbath implies that, for every $1 generated by the sale of a Blue Jay Model, they have $0.80 that contributes

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis  131

to fixed costs and profit. Thus, 20% of each sales dollar represents the variable cost of the item and 80% of the
sales dollar is margin. Just as each product or service has its own contribution margin on a per unit basis, each
has a unique contribution margin ratio. Although this process is extremely useful for analyzing the profitability
of a single product, good, or service, managers also need to see the "big picture" and will examine
contribution margin in total across all products, goods, or services.

   YOUR TURN

   Margin at the Kiosk

   You rent a kiosk in the mall for $300 a month and use it to sell T-shirts with college logos from colleges and
   universities all over the world. You sell each T-shirt for $25, and your cost for each shirt is $15. You also pay
   your sales person a commission of $0.50 per T-shirt sold in addition to a salary of $400 per month. Construct a
   contribution margin income statement for two different months: in one month, assume 100 T-shirts are sold,
   and in the other, assume 200 T-shirts are sold.
   Solution

Total Contribution Margin

This "big picture" is gained by calculating total contribution margin--the total amount by which total sales
exceed total variable costs. We calculate total contribution margin by multiplying per unit contribution margin
by sales volume or number of units sold. This approach allows managers to determine how much profit a
company is making before paying its fixed expenses. For Hicks Manufacturing, if the managers want to
determine how much their Blue Jay Model contributes to the overall profitability of the company, they can
calculate total contribution margin as follows:

For the month of April, sales from the Blue Jay Model contributed $36,000 toward fixed costs. Looking at
132  Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

contribution margin in total allows managers to evaluate whether a particular product is profitable and how
the sales revenue from that product contributes to the overall profitability of the company. In fact, we can
create a specialized income statement called a contribution margin income statement to determine how
changes in sales volume impact the bottom line.

To illustrate how this form of income statement can be used, contribution margin income statements for Hicks
Manufacturing are shown for the months of April and May.

In April, Hicks sold 500 Blue Jay Models at $100 per unit, which resulted in the operating income shown on the
contribution margin income statement:

In May, 750 of the Blue Jay models were sold as shown on the contribution margin income statement. When
comparing the two statements, take note of what changed and what remained the same from April to May.

Using this contribution margin format makes it easy to see the impact of changing sales volume on operating
income. Fixed costs remained unchanged; however, as more units are produced and sold, more of the per-unit
sales price is available to contribute to the company's net income.
Before going further, let's note several key points about CVP and the contribution margin income statement.
First, the contribution margin income statement is used for internal purposes and is not shared with external
stakeholders. Secondly, in this specialized income statement, when "operating income" is shown, it actually
refers to "net operating income" without regard to income taxes. Companies can also consider taxes when
performing a CVP analysis to project both net operating income and net income. (The preparation of
contribution margin income statements with regard to taxes is covered in advanced accounting courses; here,
we will consider net income as net operating income without regard to taxes.)
Regardless of whether contribution margin is calculated on a per-unit basis, calculated as a ratio, or
incorporated into an income statement, all three express how much sales revenue is available to cover fixed
expenses and contribute to profit. Let's examine how all three approaches convey the same financial
performance, although represented somewhat differently.
You will recall that the per-unit contribution margin was $80 for a Hicks Blue Jay birdbath. When Hicks sold 500
units, each unit contributed $80 to fixed expenses and profit, which can be verified from April's income
statement:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis  133

Now, let's use May's Contribution Margin Income Statement as previously calculated to verify the contribution
margin based on the contribution margin ratio previously calculated, which was 80%, by applying this formula:

Regardless of how contribution margin is expressed, it provides critical information for managers.
Understanding how each product, good, or service contributes to the organization's profitability allows
managers to make decisions such as which product lines they should expand or which might be discontinued.
When allocating scarce resources, the contribution margin will help them focus on those products or services
with the highest margin, thereby maximizing profits.

The Evolution of Cost-Volume-Profit Relationships

The CVP relationships of many organizations have become more complex recently because many labor-
intensive jobs have been replaced by or supplemented with technology, changing both fixed and variable
costs. For those organizations that are still labor-intensive, the labor costs tend to be variable costs, since at
higher levels of activity there will be a demand for more labor usage. For example, assuming one worker is
needed for every 50 customers per hour, we might need two workers for an average sales season, but during
the Thanksgiving and Christmas season, the store might experience 250 customers per hour and thus would
need five workers.
However, the growing trend in many segments of the economy is to convert labor-intensive enterprises
(primarily variable costs) to operations heavily dependent on equipment or technology (primarily fixed costs).
For example, in retail, many functions that were previously performed by people are now performed by
machines or software, such as the self-checkout counters in stores such as Walmart, Costco, and Lowe's. Since
machine and software costs are often depreciated or amortized, these costs tend to be the same or fixed, no
matter the level of activity within a given relevant range.
In China, completely unmanned grocery stores have been created that use facial recognition for accessing the
store. Patrons will shop, bag the purchased items, leave the store, and be billed based on what they put in
their bags. Along with managing the purchasing process, inventory is maintained by sensors that let managers
know when they need to restock an item.
In the United States, similar labor-saving processes have been developed, such as the ability to order groceries
or fast food online and have it ready when the customer arrives. Another major innovation affecting labor
costs is the development of driverless cars and trucks (primarily fixed costs), which will have a major impact on
the number of taxi and truck drivers in the future (primarily variable costs). Do these labor-saving processes
134                                                                               Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

change the cost structure for the company? Are variable costs decreased? What about fixed costs? Let's look
at this in more detail.

When ordering food through an app, there is no need to have an employee take the order, but someone still
needs to prepare the food and package it for the customer. The variable costs associated with the wages of
order takers will likely decrease, but the fixed costs associated with additional technology to allow for online
ordering will likely increase. When grocery customers place their orders online, this not only requires
increased fixed costs for the new technology, but it can also increase variable labor costs, as employees are
needed to fill customers' online orders. Many stores may move cashier positions to online order fulfillment
rather than hiring additional employees. Other stores may have employees fill online grocery orders during
slow or downtimes.

Using driverless cars and trucks decreases the variable costs tied to the wages of the drivers but requires a
major investment in fixed-cost assets--the autonomous vehicles--and companies would need to charge prices
that allowed them to recoup their expensive investments in the technology as well as make a profit.
Alternatively, companies that rely on shipping and delivery companies that use driverless technology may be
faced with an increase in transportation or shipping costs (variable costs). These costs may be higher because
technology is often more expensive when it is new than it will be in the future, when it is easier and more cost
effective to produce and also more accessible. A good example of the change in cost of a new technological
innovation over time is the personal computer, which was very expensive when it was first developed but has
decreased in cost significantly since that time. The same will likely happen over time with the cost of creating
and using driverless transportation.

You might wonder why a company would trade variable costs for fixed costs. One reason might be to meet
company goals, such as gaining market share. Other reasons include being a leader in the use of innovation
and improving efficiencies. If a company uses the latest technology, such as online ordering and delivery, this
may help the company attract a new type of customer or create loyalty with longstanding customers. In
addition, although fixed costs are riskier because they exist regardless of the sales level, once those fixed costs
are met, profits grow. All of these new trends result in changes in the composition of fixed and variable costs
for a company and it is this composition that helps determine a company's profit.

As you will learn in future chapters, in order for businesses to remain profitable, it is important for managers
to understand how to measure and manage fixed and variable costs for decision-making. In this chapter, we
begin examining the relationship among sales volume, fixed costs, variable costs, and profit in decision-
making. We will discuss how to use the concepts of fixed and variable costs and their relationship to profit to
determine the sales needed to break even or to reach a desired profit. You will also learn how to plan for
changes in selling price or costs, whether a single product, multiple products, or services are involved.

   THINK IT THROUGH

   Deciding Between Orders

   You are evaluating orders from two new customers, but you will only be able to accept one of the orders
   without increasing your fixed costs. Management has directed you to choose the one that is most
   profitable for the company. Customer A is ordering 500 units and is willing to pay $200 per unit, and
   these units have a contribution margin of $60 per unit. Customer B is ordering 1,000 units and is willing

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis                                                                     135

to pay $140 per unit, and these units have a contribution margin ratio of 40%. Which order do you select
and why?

LINK TO LEARNING

Watch this video from Investopedia reviewing the concept of contribution margin (https://openstax.org/
l/50ContMargin) to learn more. Keep in mind that contribution margin per sale first contributes to
meeting fixed costs and then to profit.

 3.2 Calculate a Break-Even Point in Units and Dollars

In Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting, you learned how to determine and recognize the fixed and
variable components of costs, and now you have learned about contribution margin. Those concepts can be
used together to conduct cost-volume-profit (CVP) analysis, which is a method used by companies to
determine what will occur financially if selling prices change, costs (either fixed or variable) change, or sales/
production volume changes.

It is important, first, to make several assumptions about operations in order to understand CVP analysis and
the associated contribution margin income statement. However, while the following assumptions are typical in
CVP analysis, there can be exceptions. For example, while we typically assume that the sales price will remain
the same, there might be exceptions where a quantity discount might be allowed. Our CVP analysis will be
based on these assumptions:

  · Costs are linear and can clearly be designated as either fixed or variable. In other words, fixed costs
      remain fixed in total over the relevant range and variable costs remain fixed on a per-unit basis. For
      example, if a company has the capability of producing up to 1,000 units a month of a product given its
      current resources, the relevant range would be 0 to 1,000. If they decided that they wanted to produce
      1,800 units a month, they would have to secure additional production capacity. While they might be able
      to add an extra production shift and then produce 1,800 units a month without buying an additional
      machine that would increase production capacity to 2,000 units a month, companies often have to buy
      additional production equipment to increase their relevant range. In this example, the production
      capacity between 1,800 and 2,000 would be an expense that currently would not provide additional
      contribution toward fixed costs.

  · Selling price per unit remains constant and does not increase or decrease based on volume (i.e.,
      customers are not given discounts based on quantity purchased).

  · In the case of manufacturing businesses, inventory does not change because we make the assumption
      that all units produced are sold.

  · In the case of a company that sells multiple products, the sales mix remains constant. For example, if we
      are a beverage supplier, we might assume that our beverage sales are 3 units of coffee pods and two
      units of tea bags.

Using these assumptions, we can begin our discussion of CVP analysis with the break-even point.
136                                                                               Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

Basics of the Break-Even Point

The break-even point is the dollar amount (total sales dollars) or production level (total units produced) at
which the company has recovered all variable and fixed costs. In other words, no profit or loss occurs at break-
even because Total Cost = Total Revenue. Figure 3.3 illustrates the components of the break-even point:

Figure 3.3  Break-Even Point. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
license)

The basic theory illustrated in Figure 3.3 is that, because of the existence of fixed costs in most production
processes, in the first stages of production and subsequent sale of the products, the company will realize a
loss. For example, assume that in an extreme case the company has fixed costs of $20,000, a sales price of
$400 per unit and variable costs of $250 per unit, and it sells no units. It would realize a loss of $20,000 (the
fixed costs) since it recognized no revenue or variable costs. This loss explains why the company's cost graph
recognized costs (in this example, $20,000) even though there were no sales. If it subsequently sells units, the
loss would be reduced by $150 (the contribution margin) for each unit sold. This relationship will be continued
until we reach the break-even point, where total revenue equals total costs. Once we reach the break-even
point for each unit sold the company will realize an increase in profits of $150.

For each additional unit sold, the loss typically is lessened until it reaches the break-even point. At this stage,
the company is theoretically realizing neither a profit nor a loss. After the next sale beyond the break-even
point, the company will begin to make a profit, and the profit will continue to increase as more units are sold.
While there are exceptions and complications that could be incorporated, these are the general guidelines for
break-even analysis.

As you can imagine, the concept of the break-even point applies to every business endeavor--manufacturing,
retail, and service. Because of its universal applicability, it is a critical concept to managers, business owners,
and accountants. When a company first starts out, it is important for the owners to know when their sales will
be sufficient to cover all of their fixed costs and begin to generate a profit for the business. Larger companies
may look at the break-even point when investing in new machinery, plants, or equipment in order to predict
how long it will take for their sales volume to cover new or additional fixed costs. Since the break-even point

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis  137

represents that point where the company is neither losing nor making money, managers need to make
decisions that will help the company reach and exceed this point as quickly as possible. No business can
operate for very long below break-even. Eventually the company will suffer losses so great that they are forced
to close their doors.

   ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

   Break-Even Analysis and Profitability

   The first step in determining the viability of the business decision to sell a product or provide a service is
   analyzing the true cost of the product or service and the timeline of payment for the product or service.
   Ethical managers need an estimate of a product or service's cost and related revenue streams to
   evaluate the chance of reaching the break-even point.
   Determining an accurate price for a product or service requires a detailed analysis of both the cost and
   how the cost changes as the volume increases. This analysis includes the timing of both costs and
   receipts for payment, as well as how these costs will be financed. An example is an IT service contract for
   a corporation where the costs will be frontloaded. When costs or activities are frontloaded, a greater
   proportion of the costs or activities occur in an earlier stage of the project. An IT service contract is
   typically employee cost intensive and requires an estimate of at least 120 days of employee costs before
   a payment will be received for the costs incurred. An IT service contract for $100,000 in monthly services
   with a 30% profit margin will require 4 months of upfront financing of $280,000 balanced over the four
   months before a single payment is received.
   The overall profit at a specific point in time requires a careful determination of all of the costs associated
   with creating and selling the product or providing the service. An ethical managerial accountant will
   provide a realistic cost estimate, regardless of management's desire to sell a product or provide a
   service. What might be a lucrative product on its face needs additional analysis provided by the
   managerial accountant.

To illustrate the concept of break-even, we will return to Hicks Manufacturing and look at the Blue Jay birdbath
they manufacture and sell.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Watch this video of an example of performing the first steps of cost-volume-profit analysis
   (https://openstax.org/l/50CVPanalysis) to learn more.

Sales Where Operating Income Is $0

Hicks Manufacturing is interested in finding out the point at which they break even selling their Blue Jay Model
birdbath. They will break even when the operating income is $0. The operating income is determined by
138                                                                               Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

subtracting the total variable and fixed costs from the sales revenue generated by an enterprise. In other
words, the managers at Hicks want to know how many Blue Jay birdbaths they will need to sell in order to
cover their fixed expenses and break even. Information on this product is:

In order to find their break-even point, we will use the contribution margin for the Blue Jay and determine how
many contribution margins we need in order to cover the fixed expenses, as shown in the formula in
Figure 3.4.

Figure 3.4 Break-Even Point in Units. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA
4.0 license)

Applying this to Hicks calculates as:
                                                          $18,000 $80 = 225 units

What this tells us is that Hicks must sell 225 Blue Jay Model birdbaths in order to cover their fixed expenses. In
other words, they will not begin to show a profit until they sell the 226th unit. This is illustrated in their
contribution margin income statement.

The break-even point for Hicks Manufacturing at a sales volume of $22,500 (225 units) is shown graphically in
Figure 3.5.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis  139

Figure 3.5 Hicks Manufacturing Break-Even Point for 225 Units. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
As you can see, when Hicks sells 225 Blue Jay Model birdbaths, they will make no profit, but will not suffer a
loss because all of their fixed expenses are covered. However, what happens when they do not sell 225 units?
If that happens, their operating income is negative.

Sales Where Operating Income Is Negative

In a recent month, local flooding caused Hicks to close for several days, reducing the number of units they
could ship and sell from 225 units to 175 units. The information in Figure 3.6 reflects this drop in sales.

Figure 3.6 Hicks Manufacturing Contribution Margin Income Statement. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
At 175 units ($17,500 in sales), Hicks does not generate enough sales revenue to cover their fixed expenses
and they suffer a loss of $4,000. They did not reach the break-even point of 225 units.
140  Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

Figure 3.7 Hicks Manufacturing Break-Even Point for 175 Units. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Sales Where Operating Income Is Positive

What happens when Hicks has a busy month and sells 300 Blue Jay birdbaths? We have already established
that the contribution margin from 225 units will put them at break-even. When sales exceed the break-even
point the unit contribution margin from the additional units will go toward profit. This is reflected on their
income statement.

Again, looking at the graph for break-even (Figure 3.8), you will see that their sales have moved them beyond
the point where total revenue is equal to total cost and into the profit area of the graph.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis  141

Figure 3.8 Hicks Manufacturing Break-Even Point for 300 Units. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Hicks Manufacturing can use the information from these different scenarios to inform many of their decisions
about operations, such as sales goals.
However, using the contribution margin per unit is not the only way to determine a break-even point. Recall
that we were able to determine a contribution margin expressed in dollars by finding the contribution margin
ratio. We can apply that contribution margin ratio to the break-even analysis to determine the break-even
point in dollars. For example, we know that Hicks had $18,000 in fixed costs and a contribution margin ratio of
80% for the Blue Jay model. We will use this ratio (Figure 3.9) to calculate the break-even point in dollars.

Figure 3.9 Break-Even Point in Dollars. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA
4.0 license)

Applying the formula to Hicks gives this calculation:
                                                           $18,000 = $22,500
                                                             0.80

Hicks Manufacturing will have to generate $22,500 in monthly sales in order to cover all of their fixed costs. In
order for us to verify that Hicks' break-even point is $22,500 (or 225 units) we will look again at the
contribution margin income statement at break-even:
142  Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

By knowing at what level sales are sufficient to cover fixed expenses is critical, but companies want to be able
to make a profit and can use this break-even analysis to help them.

   THINK IT THROUGH

   The Cost of a Haircut

   You are the manager of a hair salon and want to know how many ladies' haircuts your salon needs to sell
   in a month in order to cover the fixed costs of running the salon. You have determined that, at the
   current price of $35 per haircut, you have $20 in variable costs associated with each cut. These variable
   costs include stylist wages, hair product, and shop supplies. Your fixed costs are $3,000 per month. You
   perform a break-even analysis on a per-unit basis and discover the following:

   You have 4 stylists plus yourself working in the salon and are open 6 days per week. Considering the
   break-even point and the number of available stylists, will the salon ever break even? If it does, what will
   need to happen? What can be done to achieve the break-even point?

Examples of the Effects of Variable and Fixed Costs in Determining the Break-Even Point

Companies typically do not want to simply break even, as they are in business to make a profit. Break-even
analysis also can help companies determine the level of sales (in dollars or in units) that is needed to make a
desired profit. The process for factoring a desired level of profit into a break-even analysis is to add the desired
level of profit to the fixed costs and then calculate a new break-even point. We know that Hicks Manufacturing
breaks even at 225 Blue Jay birdbaths, but what if they have a target profit for the month of July? They can
simply add that target to their fixed costs. By calculating a target profit, they will produce and (hopefully) sell
enough bird baths to cover both fixed costs and the target profit.
If Hicks wants to earn $16,000 in profit in the month of May, we can calculate their new break-even point as
follows:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis                                                                          143

Target Profi = Fixed costs + desired profi Contribution margin per unit = $18,000 + $16,000 $80 = 425 units

We have already established that the $18,000 in fixed costs is covered at the 225 units mark, so an additional
200 units will cover the desired profit (200 units × $80 per unit contribution margin = $16,000). Alternatively, we
can calculate this in terms of dollars by using the contribution margin ratio.

Target Profi = Fixed costs + desired profi = $18,000 + $16,000 = $42,500
                                       Contribution margin ratio     0.80

As done previously, we can confirm this calculation using the contribution margin income statement:

Note that the example calculations ignored income taxes, which implies we were finding target operating
income. However, companies may want to determine what level of sales would generate a desired after-tax
profit. To find the break-even point at a desired after-tax profit, we simply need to convert the desired after-tax
profit to the desired pre-tax profit, also referred to as operating income, and then follow through as in the
example. Suppose Hicks wants to earn $24,000 after-taxes, what level of sales (units and dollars) would be
needed to meet that goal? First, the after-tax profit needs to be converted to a pre-tax desired profit:

                                              Pre-tax desired profi = After-tax profi (1 - tax rate)

If the tax rate for Hicks is 40%, then the $24,000 after-tax profit is equal to a pre-tax profit of $40,000:

                                       $40,000 = $24,000
                                                    (1 - 0.40)

The tax rate indicates the amount of tax expense that will result from any profits and 1 - tax rate indicates the
amount remaining after taking out tax expense. The concept is similar to buying an item on sale. If an item
costs $80 and is on sale for 40% off, then the amount being paid for the item is 60% of the sale price, or $48
($80 × 60%). Another way to find this involves two steps. First find the discount ($80 × 40% = $32) and then
subtract the discount from the sales price ($80 - $32 = $48).

Taxes and profit work in a similar fashion. If we know the profit before tax is $100,000 and the tax rate is 30%,
then tax expenses are $100,000 × 30% = $30,000. This means the after-tax income is $100,000 - $30,000 =
$70,000. However, in most break-even situations, as well as other decision-making areas, the desired after-tax
profit is known, and the pre-tax profit must be determined by dividing the after-tax profit by 1 - tax rate.

To demonstrate the combination of both a profit and the after-tax effects and subsequent calculations, let's
return to the Hicks Manufacturing example. Let's assume that we want to calculate the target volume in units
and revenue that Hicks must sell to generate an after-tax return of $24,000, assuming the same fixed costs of
$18,000.

Since we earlier determined $24,000 after-tax equals $40,000 before-tax if the tax rate is 40%, we simply use
the break-even at a desired profit formula to determine the target sales.

 Target sales = Fixed costs + Desired profi   = $18,000 + $40,000 = 725 units
                                       Contribution margin per unit  $80

This calculation demonstrates that Hicks would need to sell 725 units at $100 a unit to generate $72,500 in
144                                                                                     Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

sales to earn $24,000 in after-tax profits.

Alternatively, target sales in sales dollars could have been calculated using the contribution margin ratio:

      Target sales = Fixed costs + Desired profi   = $18,000 + $40,000 = $72,500
     Contribution margin per unit                                                 0.80

Once again, the contribution margin income statement proves the sales and profit relationships.

Thus, to calculate break-even point at a particular after-tax income, the only additional step is to convert after-
tax income to pre-tax income prior to utilizing the break-even formula. It is good to understand the impact of
taxes on break-even analysis as companies will often want to plan based on the after-tax effects of a decision
as the after-tax portion of income is the only part of income that will be available for future use.

Application of Break-Even Concepts for a Service Organization

Because break-even analysis is applicable to any business enterprise, we can apply these same principles to a
service organization. For example, Marshall & Hirito is a mid-sized accounting firm that provides a wide range
of accounting services to its clients but relies heavily on personal income tax preparation for much of its
revenue. They have analyzed the cost to the firm associated with preparing these returns. They have
determined the following cost structure for the preparation of a standard 1040A Individual Income Tax Return:

They have fixed costs of $14,000 per month associated with the salaries of the accountants who are
responsible for preparing the Form 1040A. In order to determine their break-even point, they first determine
the contribution margin for the Form 1040A as shown:

Now they can calculate their break-even point:

     Break-Even Point in Units =                Total fi ed costs                 = $14,000 = 56 returns
                                             Contribution margin per unit $250

Remember, this is the break-even point in units (the number of tax returns) but they can also find a break-
even point expressed in dollars by using the contribution margin ratio. First, they find the contribution margin
ratio. Then, they use the ratio to calculate the break-even point in dollars:

     Break-Even Point in Dollars =              Fixed costs                       = $14,000 = $22,400
                                                Contribution margin ratio 0.625

We can confirm these figures by preparing a contribution margin income statement:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis                                                                           145

Therefore, as long as Marshall & Hirito prepares 56 Form 1040 income tax returns, they will earn no profit but
also incur no loss. What if Marshall & Hirito has a target monthly profit of $10,000? They can use the break-
even analysis process to determine how many returns they will need to prepare in order to cover their fixed
expenses and reach their target profit:

                      Target Profi = Fixed costs + desired profi Contribution margin per unit = $14,000 + $10,000 $250 = 96 returns

They will need to prepare 96 returns during the month in order to realize a $10,000 profit. Expressing this in
dollars instead of units requires that we use the contribution margin ratio as shown:

Target Profi = Fixed costs + desired profi = $14,000 + $10,000 = $38,400
                                       Contribution margin per unit  0.625

Marshall & Hirito now knows that, in order to cover the fixed costs associated with this service, they must
generate $38,400 in revenue. Once again, let's verify this by constructing a contribution margin income
statement:

As you can see, the $38,400 in revenue will not only cover the $14,000 in fixed costs, but will supply Marshall &
Hirito with the $10,000 in profit (net income) they desire.

As you've learned, break-even can be calculated using either contribution margin per unit or the contribution
margin ratio. Now that you have seen this process, let's look at an example of these two concepts presented
together to illustrate how either method will provide the same financial results.

Suppose that Channing's Chairs designs, builds, and sells unique ergonomic desk chairs for home and
business. Their bestselling chair is the Spine Saver. Figure 3.10 illustrates how Channing could determine the
break-even point in sales dollars using either the contribution margin per unit or the contribution margin
ratio.
146  Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

Figure 3.10 Channing's Break-Even Point. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-
SA 4.0 license)

Note that in either scenario, the break-even point is the same in dollars and units, regardless of approach.
Thus, you can always find the break-even point (or a desired profit) in units and then convert it to sales by
multiplying by the selling price per unit. Alternatively, you can find the break-even point in sales dollars and
then find the number of units by dividing by the selling price per unit.

   YOUR TURN

   College Creations

   College Creations, Inc (CC), builds a loft that is easily adaptable to most dorm rooms or apartments and
   can be assembled into a variety of configurations. Each loft is sold for $500, and the cost to produce one
   loft is $300, including all parts and labor. CC has fixed costs of $100,000.
     A. What happens if CC produces nothing?
     B. Now, assume CC produces and sells one unit (loft). What are their financial results?
     C. Now, what do you think would happen if they produced and sold 501 units?
    D. How many units would CC need to sell in order to break even?

     E. How many units would CC need to sell if they wanted to have a pretax profit of $50,000?
   Solution
   A. If they produce nothing, they will still incur fixed costs of $100,000. They will suffer a net loss of
   $100,000.
   B. If they sell one unit, they will have a net loss of $99,800.

   C. If they produce 501 units, they will have operating income of $200 as shown:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis  147

   D. Break-even can be determined by FC/CM per unit: $100,000 ÷ $200 = 500. Five hundred lofts must be
   sold to break even.
   E. The desired profit can be treated like a fixed cost, and the target profit would be (FC + Desired
   Profit)/CM or ($100,000 + $50,000) ÷ $200 = 750. Seven hundred fifty lofts need to be sold to reach a
   desired income of $50,000. Another way to have found this is to know that, after fixed costs are met, the
   $200 per unit contribution margin will go toward profit. The desired profit of $50,000 ÷ $200 per unit
   contribution margin = 250. This means that 250 additional units must be sold. To break even requires 500
   units to be sold, and to reach the desired profit of $50,000 requires an additional 250 units, for a total of
   750 units.

 3.3 Perform Break-Even Sensitivity Analysis for a Single Product Under
Changing Business Situations

Finding the break-even point or the sales necessary to meet a desired profit is very useful to a business, but
cost-volume-profit analysis also can be used to conduct a sensitivity analysis, which shows what will happen
if the sales price, units sold, variable cost per unit, or fixed costs change. Companies use this type of analysis to
consider possible scenarios that assist them in planning.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Watch this video that shows what happens if one or more of the variables in a break-even analysis is
   changed (https://openstax.org/l/50BrkEvenChange) to learn more.

The Effects on Break-Even under Changing Business Conditions

Circumstances often change within a company, within an industry, or even within the economy that impact the
decision-making of an organization. Sometimes, these effects are sudden and unexpected, for example, if a
hurricane destroyed the factory of a company's major supplier; other times, they occur more slowly, such as
when union negotiations affect your labor costs. In either of these situations, costs to the company will be
affected. Using CVP analysis, the company can predict how these changes will affect profits.

Changing a Single Variable

To demonstrate the effects of changing any one of these variables, consider Back Door Café, a small coffee
shop that roasts its own beans to make espresso drinks and gourmet coffee. They also sell a variety of baked
148  Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

goods and T-shirts with their logo on them. They track their costs carefully and use CVP analysis to make sure
that their sales cover their fixed costs and provide a reasonable level of profit for the owners.

Change in Sales Price

The owner of Back Door has one of her employees conduct a survey of the other coffee shops in the area and
finds that they are charging $0.75 more for espresso drinks. As a result, the owner wants to determine what
would happen to operating income if she increased her price by just $0.50 and sales remained constant, so she
performs the following analysis:

The only variable that has changed is the $0.50 increase in the price of their espresso drinks, but the net
operating income will increase by $750. Another way to think of this increase in income is that, if the sales
price increases by $0.50 per expresso drink and the estimated sales are 1,500 units, then this will result in an
increase in overall contribution margin of $750. Moreover, since all of the fixed costs were met by the lower
sales price, all of this $750 goes to profit. Again, this is assuming the higher sales price does not decrease the
number of units sold. Since the other coffee shops will still be priced higher than Back Door, the owner
believes that there will not be a decrease in sales volume.
When making this adjustment to their sales price, Back Door Café is engaging in target pricing, a process in
which a company uses market analysis and production information to determine the maximum price
customers are willing to pay for a good or service in addition to the markup percentage. If the good can be
produced at a cost that allows both the desired profit percentage as well as deliver the good at a price
acceptable to the customer, then the company should proceed with the product; otherwise, the company will
not achieve its desired profit goals.

Change in Variable Cost

In March, the owner of Back Door receives a letter from her cups supplier informing her that there is a $0.05
price increase due to higher material prices. Assume that the example uses the original $3.75 per unit sales

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis  149

price. The owner wants to know what would happen to net operating income if she absorbs the cost increase,
so she performs the following analysis:

She is surprised to see that just a $0.05 increase in variable costs (cups) will reduce her net income by $75. The
owner may decide that she is fine with the lower income, but if she wants to maintain her income, she will
need to find a new cup supplier, reduce other costs, or pass the price increase on to her customers. Because
the increase in the cost of the cups was a variable cost, the impact on net income can be seen by taking the
increase in cost per unit, $0.05, and multiplying that by the units expected to be sold, 1,500, to see the impact
on the contribution margin, which in this case would be a decrease of $75. This also means a decrease in net
income of $75.

Change in Fixed Cost

Back Door Café's lease is coming up for renewal. The owner calls the landlord to indicate that she wants to
renew her lease for another 5 years. The landlord is happy to hear she will continue renting from him but
informs her that the rent will increase $225 per month. She is not certain that she can afford an additional
$225 per month and tells him she needs to look at her numbers and will call him back. She pulls out her CVP
spreadsheet and adjusts her monthly fixed costs upwards by $225. Assume that the example uses the original
$3.75 per unit sales price. The results of her analysis of the impact of the rent increase on her annual net
income are:
150                                                                                       Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

Because the rent increase is a change in a fixed cost, the contribution margin per unit remains the same.
However, the break-even point in both units and dollars increase because more units of contribution are
needed to cover the $225 monthly increase in fixed costs. If the owner of the Back Door agrees to the increase
in rent for the new lease, she will likely look for ways to increase the contribution margin per unit to offset this
increase in fixed costs.

In each of the prior examples, only one variable was changed--sales volume, variable costs, or fixed costs.
There are some generalizations that can be made regarding how a change in any one of these variables
affects the break-even point. These generalizations are summarized in Table 3.1.

           Generalizations Regarding Changes in Break-Even Point from a Change in One Variable

     Condition                                                                    Result

Sales Price     Break-Even Point Decreases (Contribution Margin is Higher, Need Fewer Sales to
Increases       Break Even)

Sales Price     Break-Even Point Increases (Contribution Margin is Lower, Need More Sales to Break
Decreases       Even)

Variable Costs  Break-Even Point Increases (Contribution Margin is Lower, Need More Sales to Break
Increase        Even)

Variable Costs  Break-Even Point Decreases (Contribution Margin is Higher, Need Fewer Sales to
Decrease        Break Even)

Table 3.1

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis                                                                       151

           Generalizations Regarding Changes in Break-Even Point from a Change in One Variable

Condition                              Result

Fixed Costs  Break-Even Point Increases (Contribution Margin Does Not Change, but Need More
Increase     Sales to Meet Fixed Costs)

Fixed Costs  Break-Even Point Decreases (Contribution Margin Does Not Change, but Need Fewer
Decrease     Sales to Meet Fixed Costs)

Table 3.1

LINK TO LEARNING

Watch this video that walks through, step by step, how to calculate break even in units and dollars and at
a desired profit or sales level (https://openstax.org/l/50BreakEven$) to learn more.

Changing Multiple Variables

We have analyzed situations in which one variable changes, but often, more than one change will occur at a
time. For example, a company may need to lower its selling price to compete, but they may also be able to
lower certain variable costs by switching suppliers.

Suppose Back Door Café has the opportunity to purchase a new espresso machine that will reduce the amount
of coffee beans required for an espresso drink by putting the beans under higher pressure. The new machine
will cost $15,000, but it will decrease the variable cost per cup by $0.05. The owner wants to see what the effect
will be on the net operating income and break-even point if she purchases the new machine. She has arranged
financing for the new machine and the monthly payment will increase her fixed costs by $400 per month.
When she conducts this analysis, she gets the following results:
152  Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

Looking at the "what-if" analysis, we see that the contribution margin per unit increases because of the $0.05
reduction in variable cost per unit. As a result, she has a higher total contribution margin available to cover
fixed expenses. This is good, because the monthly payment on the espresso machine represents an increased
fixed cost. Even though the contribution margin ratio increases, it is not enough to totally offset the increase in
fixed costs, and her monthly break-even point has risen from $4,125.00 to $4,687.50. If the new break-even
point in units is a realistic number (within the relevant range), then she would decide to purchase the new
machine because, once it has been paid for, her break-even point will fall and her net income will rise.
Performing this analysis is an effective way for managers and business owners to look into the future, so to
speak, and see what impact business decisions will have on their financial position.
Let's look at another option the owner of the Back Door Café has to consider when making the decision about
this new machine. What would happen if she purchased the new machine to realize the variable cost savings
and also raised her price by just $0.20? She feels confident that such a small price increase will go virtually
unnoticed by her customers but may help her offset the increase in fixed costs. She runs the analysis as
follows:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis  153

The analysis shows the expected result: an increase in the per-unit contribution margin, a decrease in the
break-even point, and an increase in the net operating income. She has changed three variables in her
costs--sales price, variable cost, and fixed cost. In fact, the small price increase almost gets her back to the net
operating income she realized before the purchase of the new expresso machine.

By now, you should begin to understand why CVP analysis is such a powerful tool. The owner of Back Door
Café can run an unlimited number of these what-if scenarios until she meets the financial goals for her
company. There are very few tools in managerial accounting as powerful and meaningful as a cost-volume-
profit analysis.

   CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

   Value Menus

   In January 2018, McDonald's brought back its $1 value menu. After discontinuing its popular Dollar Menu
   six years previously, the new version has a list of items priced not only at $1, but at $2 and $3 as well.
   How can McDonald's afford to offer menu items at this discounted price? Volume! Although the margin
   on each unit is very small, the food chain hopes to make up the difference in quantity. They also hope
   that consumers will add higher priced (and higher margin) items to their orders.[1] The strategy is not
   without its risks, however, as rising food or labor costs could put franchisees in a position where the
   value pricing does not cover their product costs. Rivals Taco Bell and Dunkin' Donuts have aggressively
   marketed their value menus, making it almost impossible for McDonald's to ignore the growing trend
   among consumers for "value pricing." Watch this video (https://openstax.org/l/50BrkEvenChange1) to
   see what McDonald's is offering consumers.
154  Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

 3.4 Perform Break-Even Sensitivity Analysis for a Multi-Product Environment
Under Changing Business Situations

Up to this point in our CVP analysis, we have assumed that a company only sells one product, but we know
that, realistically, this is not the case. Most companies operate in a multi-product environment, in which they
sell different products, manufacture different products, or offer different types of services. Companies price
each one of their products or services differently, and the costs associated with each of those products or
services vary as well. In addition, companies have limited resources, such as time and labor, and must decide
which products to sell or produce and in what quantities, or which services to offer in order to be the most
profitable. These profitability considerations are often what contributes substance to a sales mix decision

The Basics of Break-Even Analysis in a Multi-Product Environment

In order to perform a break-even analysis for a company that sells multiple products or provides multiple
services, it is important to understand the concept of a sales mix. A sales mix represents the relative
proportions of the products that a company sells--in other words, the percentage of the company's total
revenue that comes from product A, product B, product C, and so forth. Sales mix is important to business
owners and managers because they seek to have a mix that maximizes profit, since not all products have the
same profit margin. Companies can maximize their profits if they are able to achieve a sales mix that is heavy
with high-margin products, goods, or services. If a company focuses on a sales mix heavy with low-margin
items, overall company profitability will often suffer.

Performing a break-even analysis for these multi-product businesses is more complex because each product
has a different selling price, a different variable cost, and, ultimately, a different contribution margin. We must
also proceed under the assumption that the sales mix remains constant; if it does change, the CVP analysis
must be revised to reflect the change in sales mix. For the sake of clarity, we will also assume that all costs are
companywide costs, and each product contributes toward covering these companywide costs.

     THINK IT THROUGH

     Selling Subs

     You are the manager of a sub shop located near a college campus. The college has recently added a fast-
     food style café to the student center, which has reduced the number of students eating at your
     restaurant. Your highest margin items are drinks (a contribution margin of approximately 90%) and
     vegetarian subs (a contribution margin of approximately 75%). How can you use CVP analysis to help you
     compete with the college's café? What would you suggest as possible ways to increase business while
     maintaining target income levels?

Calculating Break-Even Analysis in a Multi-Product Environment

When a company sells more than one product or provides more than one service, break-even analysis is more

1 Zlati Meyer. "McDonald's Hope Customers Buck Up Thursday to New Dollar Menu." USA Today. January 3, 2018. https://www.usatoday.com/
story/money/2018/01/03/mcdonalds-hopes-customers-buck-up-thursday-new-dollar-menu/996350001/

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis  155

complex because not all of the products sell for the same price or have the same costs associated with them:
Each product has its own margin. Consequently, the break-even point in a multi-product environment depends
on the mix of products sold. Further, when the mix of products changes, so does the break-even point. If
demand shifts and customers purchase more low-margin products, then the break-even point rises.
Conversely, if customers purchase more high-margin products, the break-even point falls. In fact, even if total
sales dollars remain unchanged, the break-even point can change based on the sales mix. Let's look at an
example of how break-even analysis works in a multi-product environment.

In multi-product CVP analysis, the company's sales mix is viewed as a composite unit, a selection of discrete
products associated together in proportion to the sales mix. The composite unit is not sold to customers but is
a concept used to calculate a combined contribution margin, which is then used to estimate the break-even
point. Think of a composite unit as a virtual basket of fruit that contains the proportion of individual fruits
equal to the company's sales mix. If we purchased these items individually to make the fruit basket, each one
would have a separate price and a different contribution margin. This is how a composite unit works in CVP
analysis. We calculate the contribution margins of all of the component parts of the composite unit and then
use the total to calculate the break-even point. It is important to note that fixed costs are allocated among the
various components (products) that make up this composite unit. Should a product be eliminated from the
composite unit or sales mix, the fixed costs must be re-allocated among the remaining products.

If we use the fruit basket as an example, we can look at the individual fruits that make up the basket: apples,
oranges, bananas, and pears. We see that each individual fruit has a selling price and a cost. Each fruit has its
own contribution margin. But how would we determine the contribution margin for a composite of fruit, or in
other words, for our basket of fruit?

For our particular baskets, we will use 5 apples, 3 oranges, 2 bananas, and 1 pear. This means that our product
mix is 5:3:2:1, as shown in Figure 3.11.

Figure 3.11 Contribution Margin Based on Product Mix. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Notice that the composite contribution margin is based on the number of units of each item that is included in
the composite item. If we change the composition of the basket, then the composite contribution margin
would change even though contribution margin of the individual items would not change. For example, if we
only include 4 apples, the contribution margin of a single apple is still $0.35, but the contribution margin of the
apples in the basket is $1.40, not $1.75 as it is when 5 apples are included in the basket. Let's look at an
additional example and see how we find the break-even point for a composite good.

We will consider West Brothers for an example of a multi-product break-even analysis. West Brothers
manufactures and sells 3 types of house siding: restoration vinyl, architectural vinyl, and builder grade vinyl,
each with its own sales price, variable cost, and contribution margin, as shown:
156                                                                               Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

The sales mix for West Brothers is 5 ft2 of builder grade to 3 ft2 of architectural grade to 2 ft2 of restoration
grade vinyl (a ratio of 5:3:2). This sales mix represents one composite unit, and the selling price of one
composite unit is:

West Brothers' fixed costs are $145,000 per year, and the variable costs for one composite unit are:

We will calculate the contribution margin of a composite unit for West Brothers using the same formula as
before:

Applying the formula, we determine that $73 - $42.25 = 30.75. We then use the contribution margin per
composite unit to determine West Brothers' break-even point:

Break-Even Point per Composite Unit =  Total fi ed costs                          = $145,000 = 4,715.45 composite units
                                       Contribution margin per composite unit $30.75

West Brothers will break even when it sells 4,715.45 (or 4,716 since it can't sell a partial unit) composite units.
To determine how many of each product West Brothers needs to sell, we apply their sales mix ratio (5:3:2) to
the break-even quantity as follows:

Using a forecasted or estimated contribution margin income statement, we can verify that the quantities listed
will place West Brothers at break-even.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis  157

West Brothers can use this CVP analysis for a wide range of business decisions and for planning purposes.
Remember, however, that if the sales mix changes from its current ratio, then the break-even point will
change. For planning purposes, West Brothers can change the sales mix, sales price, or variable cost of one or
more of the products in the composite unit and perform a "what-if" analysis.

   YOUR TURN

   Margins in the Sales Mix

   The sales mix of a company selling two products, A and B, is 3:1. The per-unit variable costs is $4 for
   Product A and $5 for Product B. Product A sells for $10 and product B sells for $9. Fixed costs for the
   company are $220,000.
     A. What is the contribution margin per composite unit?
     B. What is the break-even point in composite units?
     C. How many units of product A and product B will the company sell at the break-even point?
   Solution
   A.

   B.
158                                         Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

   Break-even per composite unit = 15,385.
   C.

 3.5 Calculate and Interpret a Company's Margin of Safety and Operating
Leverage

Our discussion of CVP analysis has focused on the sales necessary to break even or to reach a desired profit,
but two other concepts are useful regarding our break-even sales. Those concepts are margin of safety and
operating leverage.

Margin of Safety

A company's margin of safety is the difference between its current sales and its break-even sales. The margin
of safety tells the company how much they could lose in sales before the company begins to lose money, or, in
other words, before the company falls below the break-even point. The higher the margin of safety is, the
lower the risk is of not breaking even or incurring a loss. In order to calculate margin of safety, we use the
following formula:

Let's look at Manteo Machine, a company that machines parts that are then sold and used in the manufacture
of farm equipment. For their core product, the break-even analysis is as follows:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis  159

Interpreting this information tells Manteo Machine that, when sales equal $153,000, they will be at the break-
even point. However, as soon as sales fall below this figure, they will have negative net operating income. They
have decided that they want a margin of safety of $10,000. They can add this as if it were a fixed cost (very
much the same way we added target profit earlier) and then find a new break-even point that includes a
$10,000 margin of safety. If they approached it from this perspective, their new break-even would appear as
follows:

Figure 3.12 Manteo Machine's Margin of Safety. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

As shown in Figure 3.12, the margin of safety of 1,900 units is found from (FC + Margin of Safety)/CM per unit =
$95,000/$50. Thus, 1,900 units must be sold in order to meet fixed cost and have a $10,000 margin of safety.
Another way to see this is to realize the $10,000 margin of safety will be met in $50 increments based on the
current contribution margin. This means the company will need to sell an additional 200 units, which is an
additional $18,000 in sales to have the desired margin of safety. The true break-even, where only fixed costs
were met, was 1,700 units, or $153,000 in sales. The point at which the company would have a $10,000 margin
of safety is 1,900 units, or $171,000 in sales. Note that the new level of units is the break-even units of 1,700
plus the 200 units for the margin of safety. The same can be seen for the sales dollar. The new level of desired
sales dollars is the break-even sales of $153,000 plus the additional $18,000 in sales for the margin of safety.
The margin of safety can also be determined when a company knows its sales volume. For example, Manteo
Machine sold 2,500 units in March and wants to know its margin of safety at that sales volume:

From this analysis, Manteo Machine knows that sales will have to decrease by $72,000 from their current level
before they revert to break-even operations and are at risk to suffer a loss.
160  Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

   ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

   The Importance of Relevant Range Analysis

   Ethical managerial decision-making requires that information be communicated fairly and objectively.
   The failure to include the demand for individual products in the company's mixture of products may be
   misleading. Providing misleading or inaccurate managerial accounting information can lead to a
   company becoming unprofitable. Ignoring relevant range(s) in setting assumptions about cost behavior
   and ignoring the actual demand for the product in the company's market also distorts the information
   provided to management and may cause the management of the company to produce products that
   cannot be sold.

Many companies prefer to consider the margin of safety as a percentage of sales, rather than as a dollar
amount. In order to express margin of safety as a percentage, we divide the margin of safety (in dollars) by the
total budgeted or actual sales volume. The formula to express margin of safety as a percentage is:

Previously, we calculated Manteo Machine's margin of safety as $72,000. As a percentage, it would be
                                                        $72,000 $225,000 = 0.32 or 32%

This tells management that as long as sales do not decrease by more than 32%, they will not be operating at or
near the break-even point, where they would run a higher risk of suffering a loss. Often, the margin of safety is
determined when sales budgets and forecasts are made at the start of the fiscal year and also are regularly
revisited during periods of operational and strategic planning.

Operating Leverage

In much the same way that managers control the risk of incurring a net loss by watching their margin of
safety, being aware of the company's operating leverage is critical to the financial well-being of the firm.
Operating leverage is a measurement of how sensitive net operating income is to a percentage change in
sales dollars. Typically, the higher the level of fixed costs, the higher the level of risk. However, as sales
volumes increase, the payoff is typically greater with higher fixed costs than with higher variable costs. In
other words, the higher the risk the greater the payoff.
First, let's look at this from a general example to understand payoff. Suppose you had $10,000 to invest and
you were debating between putting that money in low risk bonds earning 3% or taking a chance and buying
stock in a new company that currently is not profitable but has an innovative product that many analysts
predict will take off and be the next "big thing." Obviously, there is more risk with buying the stock than with
buying the bonds. If the company remains unprofitable, or fails, you stand to lose all or a portion of your
investment ,whereas the bonds are less risky and will continue to pay 3% interest. However, the risk associated
with the stock investment could result in a much higher payoff if the company is successful.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis  161

So how does this relate to fixed costs and companies? Companies have many types of fixed costs including
salaries, insurance, and depreciation. These costs are present regardless of our production or sales levels. This
makes fixed costs riskier than variable costs, which only occur if we produce and sell items or services. As we
sell items, we have learned that the contribution margin first goes to meeting fixed costs and then to profits.
Here is an example of how changes in fixed costs affects profitability.

Gray Co. has the following income statement:

What is the effect of switching $10,000 of fixed costs to variable costs? What is the effect of switching $10,000
of variable costs to fixed costs?

Notice that in this instance, the company's net income stayed the same. Now, look at the effect on net income
of changing fixed to variable costs or variable costs to fixed costs as sales volume increases. Assume sales
volume increase by 10%.

As you can see from this example, moving variable costs to fixed costs, such as making hourly employees
salaried, is riskier in that fixed costs are higher. However, the payoff, or resulting net income, is higher as sales
volume increases.

This is why companies are so concerned with managing their fixed and variable costs and will sometimes
move costs from one category to another to manage this risk. Some examples include, as previously
mentioned, moving hourly employees (variable) to salaried employees (fixed), or replacing an employee
(variable) with a machine (fixed). Keep in mind that managing this type of risk not only affects operating
leverage but can have an effect on morale and corporate climate as well.
162  Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

     CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

     Fluctuating Operating Leverage: Why Do Stores Add Self-Service Checkout Lanes?

     Operating leverage fluctuations result from changes in a company's cost structure. While any change in
     either variable or fixed costs will change operating leverage, the fluctuations most often result from
     management's decision to shift costs from one category to another. As the next example shows, the
     advantage can be great when there is economic growth (increasing sales); however, the disadvantage
     can be just as great when there is economic decline (decreasing sales). This is the risk that must be
     managed when deciding how and when to cause operating leverage to fluctuate.

     Consider the impact of reducing variable costs (fewer employee staffed checkout lanes) and increasing
     fixed costs (more self-service checkout lanes). A store with $125,000,000 per year in sales installs some
     self-service checkout lanes. This increases its fixed costs by 10% but reduces its variable costs by 5%. As
     Figure 3.13 shows, at the current sales level, this could produce a whopping 35% increase in net
     operating income. And, if the change results in higher sales, the increase in net operating income would
     be even more dramatic. Do the math and you will see that each 1% increase in sales would produce a 6%
     increase in net operating income: well worth the change, indeed.

   Figure 3.13 Impact of Self-Service Checkout Lanes. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
   under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

   (in 000s) Without Selfservice Checkout Lanes, With Selfservice Checkout Lanes (respectively): Sales
   $125,000, 125,000; Variable Costs 93,750, 89,063; Contribution Margin 31,250, 35,938; Fixed Costs 25,000,
   27,500; Net Operating Income 6,250 8,438; Percent Increase in Income 35 percent.
   The company in this example also faces a downside risk, however. If customers disliked the change
   enough that sales decreased by more than 6%, net operating income would drop below the original level
   of $6,250 and could even become a loss.

Operating leverage has a multiplier effect. A multiplier effect is one in which a change in an input (such as
variable cost per unit) by a certain percentage has a greater effect (a higher percentage effect) on the output
(such as net income). To explain the concept of a multiplier effect, think of having to open a very large, heavy
wooden crate. You could pull and pull with your hands all day and still not exert enough force to get it open.
But, what if you used a lever in the form of a pry bar to multiply your effort and strength? For every additional
amount of force you apply to the pry bar, a much larger amount of force is applied to the crate. Before you

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis                                                                          163

know it, you have the crate open. Operating leverage works much like that pry bar: if operating leverage is
high, then a very small increase in sales can result in a large increase in net operating income.
How does a company increase its operating leverage? Operating leverage is a function of cost structure, and
companies that have a high proportion of fixed costs in their cost structure have higher operating leverage.
There is, however, a cautionary side to operating leverage. Since high operating leverage is the result of high
fixed costs, if the market for the company's products, goods, or services shrinks, or if demand for the
company's products, goods, or services declines, the company may find itself obligated to pay for fixed costs
with little or no sales revenue to spare. Managers who have made the decision to chase large increases in net
operating income through the use of operating leverage have found that, when market demand falls, their
only recourse is to close their doors. In fact, many large companies are making the decision to shift costs away
from fixed costs to protect them from this very problem.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   During periods of sales downturns, there are many examples of companies working to shift costs away
   from fixed costs. This Yahoo Finance article reports that many airlines are changing their cost structure
   to move away from fixed costs and toward variable costs (https://openstax.org/l/50AirlineVarCst) such as
   Delta Airlines. Although they are decreasing their operating leverage, the decreased risk of insolvency
   more than makes up for it.

In order to calculate the degree of operating leverage at a given level of sales, we will apply the following
formula:

To explain further the concept of operating leverage, we will look at two companies and their operating
leverage positions:

Both companies have the same net income of $85,000, but company B has a higher degree of operating
leverage because its fixed costs are higher than that of company A. If we want to see how operating leverage
impacts net operating income, then we can apply the following formula:

Let's assume that both company A and company B are anticipating a 10% increase in sales. Based on their
respective degrees of operating leverage, what will their percentage change in net operating income be?
164  Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

                                                  Company A: 1.71 × 10% = 17.4%
                                                  Company B: 2.47 × 10% = 24.7%

For company A, for every 10% increase in sales, net operating income will increase 17.4%. But company B has a
much higher degree of operating leverage, and a 10% increase in sales will result in a 24.7% increase in net
operating income. These examples clearly show why, during periods of growth, companies have been willing
to risk incurring higher fixed costs in exchange for large percentage gains in net operating income. But what
happens in periods where income declines?

We will return to Company A and Company B, only this time, the data shows that there has been a 20%
decrease in sales. Note that the degree of operating leverage changes for each company. The reduced income
resulted in a higher operating leverage, meaning a higher level of risk.

It is equally important to realize the percentage decrease in income for both companies. The decrease in sales
by 20% resulted in a 31.9% decrease in net income for Company A. For Company B, the 20% decrease in sales
resulted in a 46.9% decrease in net income. This also could have been found by taking the initial operating
leverage times the 20% decrease:

                  Company A: 20% decreases × 1.74 operating leverage = 34.8% decrease in net income
                  Company B: 20% decreases × 2.47 operating leverage = 49.4% decrease in net income
This example also shows why, during periods of decline, companies look for ways to reduce their fixed costs to
avoid large percentage reductions in net operating income.

   THINK IT THROUGH
   Moving Costs

   You are the managerial accountant for a large manufacturing firm. The company has sales that are well
   above its break-even point, but they have historically carried most of their costs as fixed costs. The
   outlook for the industry you are in is not positive. How could you move more costs away from fixed costs
   to put the company in a better financial position if the industry does, in fact, take a downturn?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis                                                                              165

CONTINUING APPLICATION AT WORK

Viking Grocery Stores

You might wonder why the grocery industry is not comparable to other big-box retailers such as
hardware or large sporting goods stores. Just like other big-box retailers, the grocery industry has a
similar product mix, carrying a vast of number of name brands as well as house brands. The main
difference, then, is that the profit margin per dollar of sales (i.e., profitability) is smaller than the typical
big-box retailer. Also, the inventory turnover and degree of product spoilage is greater for grocery
stores. Overall, while the fixed and variable costs are similar to other big-box retailers, a grocery store
must sell vast quantities in order to create enough revenue to cover those costs.

This is reflected in the business plan. Unlike a manufacturer, a grocery store will have hundreds of
products at one time with various levels of margin, all of which will be taken into account in the
development of their break-even analysis. Review a business plan developed by Viking Grocery Stores
(https://openstax.org/l/GroceryStore) in consideration of opening a new site in Springfield, Missouri to
see how a grocery store develops a business plan and break-even based upon multiple products.
166  Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

     Key Terms

break-even point dollar amount (total sales dollars) or production level (total units produced) at which the
     company has recovered all variable and fixed costs; it can also be expressed as that point where Total
     Cost (TC) = Total Revenue (TR)

composite unit selection of discrete products associated together in relation or proportion to their sales mix
contribution margin amount by which a product's selling price exceeds its total variable cost per unit
contribution margin ratio percentage of a unit's selling price that exceeds total unit variable costs
margin of safety difference between current sales and break-even sales
multi-product environment business environment in which a company sells different products,

     manufactures different products, or offers different types of services
multiplier effect when the change in an input by a certain percentage has a greater effect (a higher

     percentage effect) on the output
operating leverage measurement of how sensitive net operating income is to a percentage change in sales

     dollars
relevant range quantitative range of units that can be produced based on the company's current productive

     assets; for example, if a company has sufficient fixed assets to produce up to 10,000 units of product, the
     relevant range would be between 0 and 10,000 units
sales mix relative proportions of the products that a company sells
sensitivity analysis what will happen if sales price, units sold, variable cost per unit, or fixed costs change
target pricing process in which a company uses market analysis and production information to determine
     the maximum price customers are willing to pay for a good or service in addition to the markup
     percentage
total contribution margin amount by which total sales exceed total variable costs

     Summary

3.1 Explain Contribution Margin and Calculate Contribution Margin per Unit, Contribution Margin Ratio,
and Total Contribution Margin

  · Contribution margin can be used to calculate how much of every dollar in sales is available to cover fixed
      expenses and contribute to profit.

  · Contribution margin can be expressed on a per-unit basis, as a ratio, or in total.
  · A specialized income statement, the Contribution Margin Income Statement, can be useful in looking at

      total sales and total contribution margin at varying levels of activity.

3.2 Calculate a Break-Even Point in Units and Dollars
  · Break-even analysis is a tool that almost any business can use for planning and evaluation purposes. It
      helps identify a level of activity that is necessary before an organization starts to generate a profit.
  · A break-even point can be found on a per-unit basis or as a dollar amount, depending upon whether a
      per-unit contribution margin or a contribution margin ratio is applied.

3.3 Perform Break-Even Sensitivity Analysis for a Single Product Under Changing Business Situations
  · Cost-volume-profit analysis can be used to conduct a sensitivity analysis that shows what will happen if
      there are changes in any of the variables: sales price, units sold, variable cost per unit, or fixed costs.
  · The break-even point may or may not be impacted by changes in costs depending on the type of cost
      affected.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis  167

3.4 Perform Break-Even Sensitivity Analysis for a Multi-Product Environment Under Changing Business
Situations

  · Companies provide multiple products, goods, and services to the consumer and, as result, need to
      calculate their break-even point based on the mix of the products, goods, and services.

  · In a multi-product environment, calculating the break-even point is more complex and is usually
      calculated using a composite unit, which represents the sales mix of the business.

  · If the sales mix of a company changes, then the break-even point changes, regardless of whether total
      sales dollars change or not.

3.5 Calculate and Interpret a Company's Margin of Safety and Operating Leverage
  · Businesses determine a margin of safety (sales dollars beyond the break-even point). The higher the
      margin of safety is, the lower the risk is of not breaking even and incurring a loss.
  · Operating leverage is a measurement of how sensitive net operating income is to a percentage change in
      sales dollars. A high degree of operating leverage results from a cost structure that is heavily weighted in
      fixed costs.

     Multiple Choice

1. 3.1 The amount of a unit's sales price that helps to cover fixed expenses is its ________.
    A. contribution margin
    B. profit
    C. variable cost
    D. stepped cost

2. 3.1 A company's product sells for $150 and has variable costs of $60 associated with the product. What is
its contribution margin per unit?

    A. $40
    B. $60
    C. $90
    D. $150

3. 3.1 A company's product sells for $150 and has variable costs of $60 associated with the product. What is
its contribution margin ratio?

    A. 10%
    B. 40%
    C. 60%
    D. 90%

4. 3.1 A company's contribution margin per unit is $25. If the company increases its activity level from 200
units to 350 units, how much will its total contribution margin increase?

    A. $1,250
    B. $3,750
    C. $5,000
    D. $8,750
168                                                                               Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

5. 3.2 A company sells its products for $80 per unit and has per-unit variable costs of $30. What is the
contribution margin per unit?

    A. $30
    B. $50
    C. $80
    D. $110

6. 3.2 If a company has fixed costs of $6,000 per month and their product that sells for $200 has a
contribution margin ratio of 30%, how many units must they sell in order to break even?

    A. 100
    B. 180
    C. 200
    D. 2,000

7. 3.2 Company A wants to earn $5,000 profit in the month of January. If their fixed costs are $10,000 and
their product has a per-unit contribution margin of $250, how many units must they sell to reach their target
income?

    A. 20
    B. 40
    C. 60
    D. 120

8. 3.2 A company has wants to earn an income of $60,000 after-taxes. If the tax rate is 32%, what must be
the company's pre-tax income in order to have $60,000 after-taxes?

    A. $88,235
    B. $19,200
    C. $79,200
    D. $143,000

9. 3.2 A company has pre-tax or operating income of $120,000. If the tax rate is 40%, what is the company's
after-tax income?

    A. $300,000
    B. $240,000
    C. $48,000
    D. $72,000

10. 3.3 When sales price increases and all other variables are held constant, the break-even point will
________.

    A. remain unchanged
    B. increase
    C. decrease
    D. produce a lower contribution margin

11. 3.3 When sales price decreases and all other variables are held constant, the break-even point will
________.

    A. remain unchanged
    B. increase
    C. decrease
    D. produce a higher contribution margin

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis                                                                      169

12. 3.3 When variable costs increase and all other variables remain unchanged, the break-even point will
________.

    A. remain unchanged
    B. increase
    C. decrease
    D. produce a lower contribution margin

13. 3.3 When fixed costs decrease and all other variables remain unchanged, the break-even point will
________.

    A. remain unchanged
    B. increase
    C. decrease
    D. produce a lower contribution margin

14. 3.3 When fixed costs increase and all other variables remain unchanged, the contribution margin will
________.

    A. remain unchanged
    B. increase
    C. decrease
    D. increase variable costs per unit

15. 3.4 If the sales mix in a multi-product environment shifts to a higher volume in low contribution margin
products, the break-even point will ________.

    A. remain unchanged because all products are included in the calculation of break-even
    B. increase because the low contribution margin products have little effect on break-even
    C. increase because the per composite unit contribution margin will decrease
    D. decrease because the per composite unit contribution margin will increase

16.     3.4 Break-even for a multiple product firm ________.
    A.  can be calculated by dividing total fixed costs by the contribution margin of a composite unit
    B.  can be calculated by multiplying fixed costs by the contribution margin ratio of a composite unit
    C.  can only be calculated when the proportion of products sold is the same for all products
    D.  can be calculated by multiplying fixed costs by the contribution margin ratio of the most common
        product in the sales mix

17. 3.4 Waskowski Company sells three products (A, B, and C) with a sales mix of 3:2:1. Unit sales price are
shown. What is the sales price per composite unit?

A. $17.00
B. $25.00
C. $35.00
D. $20.00
170                                                                               Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

18. 3.4 Beaucheau Farms sells three products (E, F, and G) with a sale mix ratio of 3:1:2. Unit sales price are
shown. What is the sales price per composite unit?

    A. $28.00
    B. $20.00
    C. $59.00
    D. $41.00

19. 3.4 A company sells two products, Model 101 and Model 202. For every one unit of Model 101, they sell
they sell two units of Model 202. Sales and cost information for the two products is shown. What is the
contribution margin for a composite unit based on the sales mix?

    A. $14
    B. $21
    C. $35
    D. $56

20. 3.5 Wallace Industries has total contribution margin of $58,560 and net income of $24,400 for the
month of April. Wallace expects sales volume to increase by 5% in May. What are the degree of operating
leverage and the expected percent change in income for Wallace Industries?

    A. 0.42 and 2.2%
    B. 0.42 and 5%
    C. 2.4 and 12%
    D. 2.5 and 13%

21. 3.5 Macom Manufacturing has total contribution margin of $61,250 and net income of $24,500 for the
month of June. Marcus expects sales volume to increase by 10% in July. What are the degree of operating
leverage and the expected percent change in income for Macom Manufacturing?

    A. 0.4 and 10%
    B. 2.5 and 10%
    C. 2.5 and 25%
    D. 5.0 and 50%

22. 3.5 If a firm has a contribution margin of $59,690 and a net income of $12,700 for the current month,
what is their degree of operating leverage?

    A. 0.18
    B. 1.18
    C. 2.4
    D. 4.7

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis                                                                      171

23. 3.5 If a firm has a contribution margin of $78,090 and a net income of $13,700 for the current month,
what is their degree of operating leverage?

    A. 0.21
    B. 1.21
    C. 2.4
    D. 5.7

     Questions

1. 3.1 Define and explain contribution margin on a per unit basis.
2. 3.1 Define and explain contribution margin ratio.
3. 3.1 Explain how a contribution margin income statement can be used to determine profitability.
4. 3.2 In a cost-volume-profit analysis, explain what happens at the break-even point and why companies
do not want to remain at the break-even point.
5. 3.2 What is meant by a product's contribution margin ratio and how is this ratio useful in planning
business operations?
6. 3.3 Explain how a manager can use CVP analysis to make decisions regarding changes in operations or
pricing structure.
7. 3.3 After conducting a CVP analysis, most businesses will then recreate a revised or projected income
statement incorporating the results of the CVP analysis. What is the benefit of taking this extra step in the
analysis?
8. 3.3 Explain how it is possible for costs to change without changing the break-even point.
9. 3.4 Explain what a sales mix is and how changes in the sales mix affect the break-even point.
10. 3.4 Explain how break-even analysis for a multi-product company differs from a company selling a
single product.
11. 3.5 Explain margin of safety and why it is an important measurement for managers.
12. 3.5 Define operating leverage and explain its importance to a company and how it relates to risk.

     Exercise Set A

EA1. 3.1 Calculate the per-unit contribution margin of a product that has a sale price of $200 if the variable
costs per unit are $65.

EA2. 3.1 Calculate the per-unit contribution margin of a product that has a sale price of $400 if the variable
costs per unit are $165.

EA3. 3.1 A product has a sales price of $150 and a per-unit contribution margin of $50. What is the
contribution margin ratio?
172                                                                               Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

EA4. 3.1 A product has a sales price of $250 and a per-unit contribution margin of $75. What is the
contribution margin ratio?

EA5. 3.2 Maple Enterprises sells a single product with a selling price of $75 and variable costs per unit of
$30. The company's monthly fixed expenses are $22,500.

    A. What is the company's break-even point in units?
    B. What is the company's break-even point in dollars?
    C. Construct a contribution margin income statement for the month of September when they will sell 900

          units.
    D. How many units will Maple need to sell in order to reach a target profit of $45,000?
    E. What dollar sales will Maple need in order to reach a target profit of $45,000?
    F. Construct a contribution margin income statement for Maple that reflects $150,000 in sales volume.

EA6. 3.2 Marlin Motors sells a single product with a selling price of $400 with variable costs per unit of $160.
The company's monthly fixed expenses are $36,000.

    A. What is the company's break-even point in units?
    B. What is the company's break-even point in dollars?
    C. Prepare a contribution margin income statement for the month of November when they will sell 130

          units.
    D. How many units will Marlin need to sell in order to realize a target profit of $48,000?
    E. What dollar sales will Marlin need to generate in order to realize a target profit of $48,000?
    F. Construct a contribution margin income statement for the month of February that reflects $200,000 in

          sales revenue for Marlin Motors.

EA7. 3.3 Flanders Manufacturing is considering purchasing a new machine that will reduce variable costs
per part produced by $0.15. The machine will increase fixed costs by $18,250 per year. The information they
will use to consider these changes is shown here.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis  173

EA8. 3.3 Marchete Company produces a single product. They have recently received the results of a market
survey that indicates that they can increase the retail price of their product by 8% without losing customers or
market share. All other costs will remain unchanged. Their most recent CVP analysis is shown. If they enact the
8% price increase, what will be their new break-even point in units and dollars?

EA9. 3.3 Brahma Industries sells vinyl replacement windows to home improvement retailers nationwide.
The national sales manager believes that if they invest an additional $25,000 in advertising, they would
increase sales volume by 10,000 units. Prepare a forecasted contribution margin income statement for Brahma
if they incur the additional advertising costs, using this information:

EA10. 3.4 Salvador Manufacturing builds and sells snowboards, skis and poles. The sales price and variable
cost for each are shown:

Their sales mix is reflected in the ratio 7:3:2. What is the overall unit contribution margin for Salvador with
their current product mix?
EA11. 3.4 Salvador Manufacturing builds and sells snowboards, skis and poles. The sales price and variable
cost for each follows:

Their sales mix is reflected in the ratio 7:3:2. If annual fixed costs shared by the three products are $196,200,
how many units of each product will need to be sold in order for Salvador to break even?
174  Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

EA12. 3.4 Use the information from the previous exercises involving Salvador Manufacturing to determine
their break-even point in sales dollars.

EA13. 3.5 Company A has current sales of $10,000,000 and a 45% contribution margin. Its fixed costs are
$3,000,000. Company B is a service firm with current service revenue of $5,000,000 and a 20% contribution
margin. Company B's fixed costs are $500,000. Compute the degree of operating leverage for both companies.
Which company will benefit most from a 25% increase in sales? Explain why.

EA14. 3.5 Marshall & Company produces a single product and recently calculated their break-even point as
shown.

What would Marshall's target margin of safety be in units and dollars if they required a $14,000 margin of
safety?

  B Exercise Set B

EB1. 3.1 Calculate the per-unit contribution margin of a product that has a sale price of $150 if the variable
costs per unit are $40.
EB2. 3.1 Calculate the per-unit contribution margin of a product that has a sale price of $350 if the variable
costs per unit are $95.
EB3. 3.1 A product has a sales price of $175 and a per-unit contribution margin of $75. What is the
contribution margin ratio?
EB4. 3.1 A product has a sales price of $90 and a per-unit contribution margin of $30. What is the
contribution margin ratio?
EB5. 3.2 Cadre, Inc., sells a single product with a selling price of $120 and variable costs per unit of $90. The
company's monthly fixed expenses are $180,000.

    A. What is the company's break-even point in units?
    B. What is the company's break-even point in dollars?
    C. Prepare a contribution margin income statement for the month of October when they will sell 10,000

          units.
    D. How many units will Cadre need to sell in order to realize a target profit of $300,000?
    E. What dollar sales will Cadre need to generate in order to realize a target profit of $300,000?
    F. Construct a contribution margin income statement for the month of August that reflects $2,400,000 in

          sales revenue for Cadre, Inc.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis                                                              175

EB6. 3.2 Kerr Manufacturing sells a single product with a selling price of $600 with variable costs per unit of
$360. The company's monthly fixed expenses are $72,000.

    A. What is the company's break-even point in units?
    B. What is the company's break-even point in dollars?
    C. Prepare a contribution margin income statement for the month of January when they will sell 500 units.
    D. How many units will Kerr need to sell in order to realize a target profit of $120,000?
    E. What dollar sales will Kerr need to generate in order to realize a target profit of $120,000?
    F. Construct a contribution margin income statement for the month of June that reflects $600,000 in sales

          revenue for Kerr Manufacturing.

EB7. 3.2 Delta Co. sells a product for $150 per unit. The variable cost per unit is $90 and fixed costs are
$15,250. Delta Co.'s tax rate is 36% and the company wants to earn $44,000 after taxes.

    A. What would be Delta's desired pre-tax income?
    B. What would be break-even point in units to reach the income goal of $44,000 after taxes?
    C. What would be break-even point in sales dollars to reach the income goal of $44,000 after taxes?
    D. Create a contribution margin income statement to show that the break-even point calculated in B,

          generates the desired after-tax income.

EB8. 3.3 Shonda & Shonda is a company that does land surveys and engineering consulting. They have an
opportunity to purchase new computer equipment that will allow them to render their drawings and surveys
much more quickly. The new equipment will cost them an additional $1,200 per month, but they will be able to
increase their sales by 10% per year. Their current annual cost and break-even figures are as follows:

A. What will be the impact on the break-even point if Shonda & Shonda purchases the new computer?
B. What will be the impact on net operating income if Shonda & Shonda purchases the new computer?
C. What would be your recommendation to Shonda & Shonda regarding this purchase?
176  Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

EB9. 3.3 Baghdad Company produces a single product. They have recently received the result of a market
survey that indicates that they can increase the retail price of their product by 10% without losing customers or
market share. All other costs will remain unchanged. If they enact the 10% price increase, what will be their
new break-even point in units and dollars? Their most recent CVP analysis is:

EB10. 3.3 Keleher Industries manufactures pet doors and sells them directly to the consumer via their web
site. The marketing manager believes that if the company invests in new software, they will increase their sales
by 10%. The new software will increase fixed costs by $400 per month. Prepare a forecasted contribution
margin income statement for Keleher Industries reflecting the new software cost and associated increase in
sales. The previous annual statement is as follows:

EB11. 3.4 JJ Manufacturing builds and sells switch harnesses for glove boxes. The sales price and variable
cost for each follows:

Their sales mix is reflected in the ratio 4:4:1. What is the overall unit contribution margin for JJ Manufacturing
with their current product mix?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis                                                                       177

EB12. 3.4 JJ Manufacturing builds and sells switch harnesses for glove boxes. The sales price and variable
cost for each follows:

Their sales mix is reflected in the ratio 4:4:1. If annual fixed costs shared by the three products are $18,840 how
many units of each product will need to be sold in order for JJ to break even?

EB13. 3.4 Use the information from the previous exercises involving JJ Manufacturing to determine their
break-even point in sales dollars.

EB14. 3.5 Company A has current sales of $4,000,000 and a 45% contribution margin. Its fixed costs are
$600,000. Company B is a service firm with current service revenue of $2,800,000 and a 15% contribution
margin. Company B's fixed costs are $375,000. Compute the degree of operating leverage for both companies.
Which company will benefit most from a 15% increase in sales? Explain why.

EB15. 3.5 Best Wholesale recently calculated their break-even point for their Midwest operations. The
national sales manager has asked them to include a $10,500 margin of safety in their calculations. Using the
following information, recalculate Best Wholesale's break-even point in units and dollars with the $10,500
margin of safety included.

     Problem Set A

PA1. 3.1 A company sells small motors as a component part to automobiles. The Model 101 motor sells for
$850 and has per-unit variable costs of $400 associated with its production. The company has fixed expenses
of $90,000 per month. In August, the company sold 425 of the Model 101 motors.

    A. Calculate the contribution margin per unit for the Model 101.
    B. Calculate the contribution margin ratio of the Model 101.
    C. Prepare a contribution margin income statement for the month of August.

PA2. 3.1 A company manufactures and sells racing bicycles to specialty retailers. The Bomber model sells
for $450 and has per-unit variable costs of $200 associated with its production. The company has fixed
expenses of $40,000 per month. In May, the company sold 225 of the Bomber model bikes.

    A. Calculate the contribution margin per unit for the Bomber.
    B. Calculate the contribution margin ratio of the Bomber.
    C. Prepare a contribution margin income statement for the month of May.
178                                                                               Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

PA3. 3.2 Fill in the missing amounts for the four companies. Each case is independent of the others.
Assume that only one product is being sold by each company.

PA4. 3.2 Markham Farms reports the following contribution margin income statement for the month of
August. The company has the opportunity to purchase new machinery that will reduce its variable cost per unit
by $2 but will increase fixed costs by 15%. Prepare a projected contribution margin income statement for
Markham Farm assuming it purchases the new equipment. Assume sales level remains unchanged.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis  179

PA5. 3.3 Kylie's Cookies is considering the purchase of a larger oven that will cost $2,200 and will increase
her fixed costs by $59. What would happen if she purchased the new oven to realize the variable cost savings
of $0.10 per cookie, and what would happen if she raised her price by just $0.20? She feels confident that such
a small price increase will decrease the sales by only 25 units and may help her offset the increase in fixed
costs. Given the following current prices how would the break-even in units and dollars change if she doesn't
increase the selling price and if she does increase the selling price? Complete the monthly contribution margin
income statement for each of these cases.

PA6. 3.4 Morris Industries manufactures and sells three products (AA, BB, and CC). The sales price and unit
variable cost for the three products are as follows:

Their sales mix is reflected as a ratio of 5:3:2. Annual fixed costs shared by the three products are $258,000 per
year.

    A. What are total variable costs for Morris with their current product mix?
    B. Calculate the number of units of each product that will need to be sold in order for Morris to break

          even.
    C. What is their break-even point in sales dollars?
    D. Using an income statement format, prove that this is the break-even point.
180                                                                               Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

PA7. 3.4 Manatoah Manufacturing produces 3 models of window air conditioners: model 101, model 201,
and model 301. The sales price and variable costs for these three models are as follows:

The current product mix is 4:3:2. The three models share total fixed costs of $430,000.

    A. Calculate the sales price per composite unit.
    B. What is the contribution margin per composite unit?
    C. Calculate Manatoah's break-even point in both dollars and units.
    D. Using an income statement format, prove that this is the break-even point.

PA8. 3.5 Jakarta Company is a service firm with current service revenue of $400,000 and a 40% contribution
margin. Its fixed costs are $80,000. Maldives Company has current sales of $6,610,000 and a 45% contribution
margin. Its fixed costs are $1,800,000.

    A. What is the margin of safety for Jakarta and Maldives?
    B. Compare the margin of safety in dollars between the two companies. Which is stronger?
    C. Compare the margin of safety in percentage between the two companies. Now, which one is stronger?
    D. Compute the degree of operating leverage for both companies. Which company will benefit most from

          a 15% increase in sales? Explain why. Illustrate your findings in an Income Statement that is increased
          by 15%.

  B Problem Set B

PB1. 3.1 A company sells mulch by the cubic yard. Grade A much sells for $150 per cubic yard and has
variable costs of $65 per cubic yard. The company has fixed expenses of $15,000 per month. In August, the
company sold 240 cubic yards of Grade A mulch.

    A. Calculate the contribution margin per unit for Grade A mulch.
    B. Calculate the contribution margin ratio of the Grade A mulch.
    C. Prepare a contribution margin income statement for the month of August.

PB2. 3.1 A company manufactures and sells blades that are used in riding lawnmowers. The 18-inch blade
sells for $15 and has per-unit variable costs of $4 associated with its production. The company has fixed
expenses of $85,000 per month. In January, the company sold 12,000 of the 18-inch blades.

    A. Calculate the contribution margin per unit for the 18-inch blade.
    B. Calculate the contribution margin ratio of the 18-inch blade.
    C. Prepare a contribution margin income statement for the month of January.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis                                                                 181

PB3. 3.2 Fill in the missing amounts for the four companies. Each case is independent of the others.
Assume that only one product is being sold by each company.

PB4. 3.2 West Island distributes a single product. The company's sales and expenses for the month of June
are shown.

Using the information presented, answer these questions:
    A. What is the break-even point in units sold and dollar sales?
    B. What is the total contribution margin at the break-even point?
    C. If West Island wants to earn a profit of $21,000, how many units would they have to sell?
    D. Prepare a contribution margin income statement that reflects sales necessary to achieve the target
          profit.

PB5. 3.2 Wellington, Inc., reports the following contribution margin income statement for the month of
May. The company has the opportunity to purchase new machinery that will reduce its variable cost per unit
by $10 but will increase fixed costs by 20%. Prepare a projected contribution margin income statement for
Wellington, Inc., assuming it purchases the new equipment. Assume sales level remains unchanged.
182  Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

PB6. 3.3 Karen's Quilts is considering the purchase of a new Long-arm Quilt Machine that will cost $17,500
and will increase her fixed costs by $119. What would happen if she purchased the new quilt machine to realize
the variable cost savings of $5.00 per quilt, and what would happen if she raised her price by just $5.00? She
feels confident that such a small price increase will not decrease the sales in units that will help her offset the
increase in fixed costs. Given the following current prices how would the break-even in units and dollars
change? Complete the monthly contribution margin income statement for each of these cases.

PB7. 3.4 Abilene Industries manufactures and sells three products (XX, YY, and ZZ). The sales price and unit
variable cost for the three products are as follows:

Their sales mix is reflected as a ratio of 4:2:1. Annual fixed costs shared by the three products are $345,000 per
year.

    A. What are total variable costs for Abilene with their current product mix?
    B. Calculate the number of units of each product that will need to be sold in order for Abilene to break

          even.
    C. What is their break-even point in sales dollars?
    D. Using an income statement format, prove that this is the break-even point.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis  183

PB8. 3.4 Tim-Buck-II rents jet skis at a beach resort. There are three models available to rent: Junior, Adult,
and Expert. The rental price and variable costs for these three models are as follows:

The current product mix is 5:4:1. The three models share total fixed costs of $114,750

    A. Calculate the sales price per composite unit.
    B. What is the contribution margin per composite unit?
    C. Calculate Tim-Buck-II's break-even point in both dollars and units.
    D. Using an income statement format, prove that this is the break-even point.

PB9. 3.5 Fire Company is a service firm with current service revenue of $900,000 and a 40% contribution
margin. Its fixed costs are $200,000. Ice Company has current sales of $420,000 and a 30% contribution
margin. Its fixed costs are $90,000.

    A. What is the margin of safety for Fire and Ice?
    B. Compare the margin of safety in dollars between the two companies. Which is stronger?
    C. Compare the margin of safety in percentage between the two companies. Now which one is stronger?
    D. Compute the degree of operating leverage for both companies. Which company will benefit most from

          a 10% increase in sales? Explain why. Illustrate your findings in an Income Statement that is increased
          by 10%.

     Thought Provokers

TP1. 3.1 Mariana Manufacturing and Bellow Brothers compete in the same industry and in all respects their
products are virtually identical. However, most of Mariana's costs are fixed while Bellow's costs are primarily
variable. If sales increase for both companies, which will realize the greatest increase in profits? Why?

TP2. 3.2 Roald is the sales manager for a small regional manufacturing firm you own. You have asked him
to put together a plan for expanding into nearby markets. You know that Roald's previous job had him
working closely with many of your competitors in this new market, and you believe he will be able to facilitate
the company expansion. He is to prepare a presentation to you and your partners outlining his strategy for
taking the company into this expanded market. The day before the presentation, Roald comes to you and
explains that he will not be making a presentation on market expansion but instead wants to discuss several
ways he believes the company can reduce both fixed and variable costs. Why would Roald want to focus on
reducing costs rather than on expanding into a new market?
184                                                                               Chapter 3 Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

TP3. 3.3 As a manager, you have to choose between two options for new production equipment. Machine A
will increase fixed costs by a substantial margin but will produce greater sales volume at the current price.
Machine B will only slightly increase fixed costs but will produce considerable savings on variable cost per unit.
No additional sales are anticipated if Machine B is selected. What are the relative merits of both machines, and
how could you go about analyzing which machine is the better investment for the company in terms of both
net operating income and break-even?

TP4. 3.5 Couture's Creations is considering offering Joe, an hourly employee, the opportunity to become a
salaried employee. Why is this a good idea for Couture's Creations? Is this a good idea for Joe? What if
Couture's Creations entices Joe to agree to the change by offering him a salaried position with no risk of layoff
during the winter lull? What if Joe agrees and Couture's Creations lays him off anyway six months into the
agreement?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
     4

              Job Order Costing

Figure 4.1 Hallie Refinishing Furniture. Companies can generally choose from two systems--job order costing
or process costing--to account for the costs involved in making a product. Job order costing is the optimal
decision when costs are readily assigned to the individual product. Managers should consider their options to
select the best accounting system for their company's production and pricing. (credit: modification of
"120425-staining-wood-hand-brush" by r. nial bradshaw/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

 Chapter Outline

  4.1 Distinguish between Job Order Costing and Process Costing
  4.2 Describe and Identify the Three Major Components of Product Costs under Job Order Costing
  4.3 Use the Job Order Costing Method to Trace the Flow of Product Costs through the Inventory Accounts
  4.4 Compute a Predetermined Overhead Rate and Apply Overhead to Production
  4.5 Compute the Cost of a Job Using Job Order Costing
  4.6 Determine and Dispose of Underapplied or Overapplied Overhead
  4.7 Prepare Journal Entries for a Job Order Cost System
  4.8 Explain How a Job Order Cost System Applies to a Nonmanufacturing Environment

      Why It Matters

   Hallie graduated from college last year and moved to Tempe, Arizona, to begin her career. Before moving, she
   purchased a secondhand dresser for $35 and spent $25 on refinishing materials. After two hours of work, she
   posted a picture of the dresser on social media, and a friend offered her $100 to refinish another dresser
   exactly the same way.
   Fortunately, Hallie understands cost accounting and knew she needed to calculate the cost to refinish another
186                                                                               Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

dresser. She found a similar dresser for $65. She knows that the refinishing materials will cost $25, and thus
before adding in any cost for labor she is already at a cost of $90, without considering any overhead, such as
electricity to run her sander.

Hallie estimated that her labor costs should be $20 per hour. The total cost then would be $130, and accepting
less would mean accepting less for her labor. For a business in this situation, agreeing to the $100 offer would
be considered a loss. If Hallie accepts the $100 price before checking her costs, she would have received only
$10 for her labor (the sales price of $100 less the $90 cost of the dresser and materials).

Hallie didn't know if she would lose a potential customer by raising the price, so she found a different style
dresser costing $25. A sales price of $100 would be fair with the two hours to refinish at $20 per hour and a
materials cost of $25. She offered her friend the original style dresser for $130 or the alternate style dresser for
$100.

As this example illustrates, it was essential for Hallie to know the cost to complete her project. It is also
essential for all types and sizes of organizations to know the costs to complete their project. Manufacturing
organizations need to know the costs of production, retail organizations need to know the cost to sell their
products, and service organizations need to know the cost of providing their services. Management strives to
eliminate unnecessary costs and needs to know the costs associated with using large pieces of equipment as
well as seemingly insignificant office supplies. Cost accounting involves measuring and reporting the cost of
production or service, while also providing data to determine the cost of the individual unit produced.

 4.1 Distinguish between Job Order Costing and Process Costing

Pet Smart, H&R Block, Chili's, and Marshalls are popular chains often found at the same shopping center, even
though they are very different businesses. Although they have a retail store, the Pet Smart Corporation also
manufactures large volumes of its own products, whereas H&R Block prepares taxes for individual customers.
Chili's prepares food, and its wait staff provides a service, whereas Marshalls sells a variety of products at
retail.

The management of each business relies on knowing each cost when making decisions, such as setting the
sales price, planning production and staffing schedules, and ordering materials. Although these companies
share a common location, which suggests similar rental costs, all the other costs vary significantly. Because of
these cost differences, each company must have a system for gathering its cost data. For example, Pet Smart
manufactures Great Choice squeaker balls in large batches and collects cost data through a process costing
system. A process costing system is often used to trace and determine production costs when similar products
or services are provided. The concept and mechanics of a process costing system are addressed in Process
Costing.

Since a typical tax return can vary significantly from one taxpayer to the next, H&R Block provides a service
that they customize for each customer. Its cost data are collected via a job order cost system, which is
designed to allow for individualized products or services.

Marshalls does not produce a product yet still needs a system to assign overhead costs to the products it sells.
(Overhead was addressed in Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting.) And while Chili's has the same
nationwide menu, it needs a system to collect the costs for each menu item within each location.

While companies may choose different cost accounting systems, each system must be capable of
accumulating the costs incurred and allocating the costs to the product. Each costing system also requires the
ability to obtain and analyze the cost data, and the more detailed the information needed, the higher the cost
of collecting the data. The choice of cost accumulation system depends on the variety and type of products or

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing  187

services sold, or the type of manufacturing processes employed. The system used should be determined by
weighing the cost of collecting the data and the benefit of having that information.

Companies use different costing systems for determining the cost of custom products than they do for
determining the cost of mass-produced products. When products are custom ordered, knowing the cost of the
materials, labor, and overhead is critical to determining the sales price. As an easy example, think of a tailor
who alters, repairs, and makes custom clothes for customers. If a customer orders a custom-made suit, the
specific fabric, detail of any special features, and the time involved in sewing are all factors that will determine
the total cost and, therefore, the selling price of the garment. Each component of the cost of producing the
clothing will be tracked as it occurs, thus improving the accuracy of determining the price. However, in mass
production, wherein one batch leads to a second batch, stopping the process to properly identify the
materials, labor, and overhead costs used for each batch does not provide enough valuable data to justify
determining the individual costing of each product. For example, in the case of a mass-produced clothing item,
such as jeans, a company like Levi's will track costs for a batch of jeans rather than for a pair of jeans. Levi's
had over $4.9 billion in revenue in 2017 generated from the many different styles and brands of clothing items
they produce and sell. It would be difficult, and not cost effective, to track the cost of each individual clothing
item; rather, it is more efficient to track the costs in each phase of the clothing-making process. Levi's can then
accumulate the costs of the phases of production to determine the total cost of production for a batch and
allocate those costs over the number of pairs of jeans made. This process allows them to determine the cost of
each item.

Even retail companies need to know the cost of the purchased products before the sales price is set. While it
seems simple to think of the sales price as the purchase price plus a markup, determining the markup costs
needs to be an accurate process in order to ensure the sale price is higher than the product cost. To properly
capture the information necessary for decision-making, there are different costing systems that track costs in
order to determine sales prices, and to measure profits and manufacturing efficiency.

As previously mentioned, the two traditional types of costing systems are job order costing and process
costing. Each anticipates or determines unit costs of products being manufactured and/or services being
provided prior to year-end. Companies may decide to use only one or a combination of methods. This chapter
examines job order costing and demonstrates how it differs from process costing. Process Costing and other
costing systems (Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing) are covered in other chapters.

In this chapter, you will also learn the terminology used to track costs within the job order cost system and
how to segregate and aggregate these costs to determine the costs of production in a job order costing
environment. You will also learn how to record these job costs and where they appear on financial statements.

Job Order Costing versus Process Costing

Job order costing is an accounting system that traces the individual costs directly to a final job or service,
instead of to the production department. It is used when goods are made to order or when individual costs are
easy to trace to individual jobs, assuming that the additional information provides value. In these
circumstances, the individual costs are easy to trace to the individual jobs.

For example, assume that a homeowner wants to have a custom deck added to her home. Also assume that in
order to fit her lot's topography and her anticipated uses for the addition, she needs a uniquely designed
deck. Her contractor will design the deck, price the necessary components (in this case, the direct materials,
direct labor, and overhead), and construct it.

The final cost will be unique to this project. If another homeowner wanted the contractor to construct a deck,
188                                                                     Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

the contractor would go through the same design and pricing process, and you would expect that the design
and costs would not be the same as those of the deck in the first example, since the decks would differ from
one another.

The job order costing method also works well for companies such as movie production companies, print
service providers, advertising agencies, building contractors, accounting firms, consulting entities, and repair
service providers. For example, Star Wars: The Last Jedi is believed to have cost $200 million to produce,
whereas Logan only cost $97 million. The production processes for both films differed significantly, so that the
accumulated costs for each job also differed significantly. Both were made in 2017.[1]

In contrast, process costing is used when the manufacturing process is continuous, so it is difficult to establish
how much of each material is used and exactly how much time is invested in each unit of finished product.
Therefore, in process costing, costs are accounted for by the production process or production department
instead of by the product or by the job. This method works well for manufacturers of products such as Titleist
golf balls, Kellogg's cereal, Turkey Hill ice cream, CITGO gasoline, Dow Chemicals, or Sherwin Williams' paints.
However, process costing is not limited to basic manufacturing activities: It can also be used in the
manufacturing of more complex items, such as small engines. A process costing system assigns costs to each
department as the costs are incurred, and the costs to produce one unit are calculated based on the
information from the production department. Unit costs are determined after total production costs are
determined.

One factor that can complicate the choice between job order costing and process costing is the growth of
automation in the production process, which typically is accompanied by a reduction in direct labor. The cost
of the increase in equipment (typically reflected as a depreciation expense) is allocated to overhead, while the
decreased need for labor usually reduces the direct labor cost. Because of these issues, some companies
choose a hybrid system, using process costing to account for mass producing a part and using job order
costing to account for assembling some of those individual parts into a custom product. Table 4.1 summarizes
the use of these two systems.

                   Job Order and Process Cost Systems

                   Job Order Cost System               Process Cost System

Product type       Custom order                Mass production
Examples
                   Signs, buildings, tax       Folding tables, toys, buffet restaurants
Cost accumulation  returns
Work in process
inventory          Job lot                     Accumulated per process
Record keeping
                   Individual job cost sheets  Separate work in process inventory
                                               department

                   Individual job cost sheets  Production cost report

Table 4.1 This table shows some of the differences between job order costing and process costing.

1 "Production Costs and Global Box Office Revenue of Star Wars Movies from 1977 to 2018 (in million U.S. dollars)." The Statistics Portal.
https://www.statista.com/statistics/311356/star-wars-production-costs-box-office-revenue/.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing  189

To illustrate how a company can determine whether to use job order costing or process costing, consider the
cost accounting options for a local restaurant. Macs & Cheese makes specialty macaroni and cheese, and the
company wants to erect a special sign on an already constructed billboard outside a stadium. It wants to use
this space to target stadium customers; thus, the company wants a sign built specifically for that site. Dinosaur
Vinyl is secured as the sign manufacturer and would use job order costing to account for the associated
manufacturing costs because of the unique nature of the sign, including the art work involved. However, if
Macs & Cheese was designing a costing system for the specialty food product they market, they typically
would use a process costing approach because their product is made and marketed in homogeneous, similar
batches.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Dynamic Systems provides bar code-traceable software that helps companies track the costs associated
   with production (https://openstax.org/l/50barcode) . The company explains the difference between job
   order cost systems and process cost systems to their customers who often ask if their job order cost
   software is also the process cost software.

Organization of Flow of Goods through Production

Regardless of the costing method used (job order costing, process costing, or another method),
manufacturing companies are generally similar in their organizational structure and have a similar flow of
goods through production. The diagram in Figure 4.2 shows a partial organizational chart for sign
manufacturer Dinosaur Vinyl. The CEO has several direct reporting units--Financing, Production, Information
Technology, Marketing, Human Resources, and Maintenance--each with a director responsible for several
departments.
190                                                                               Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

Figure 4.2 Organizational Chart for a Manufacturing Company. The different units within Dinosaur Vinyl
illustrate the two main cost categories of a manufacturing company: manufacturing costs (the production
unit), and selling and administrative costs. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-
SA 4.0 license)

The diagram also shows the departments that report to the production unit director and gives an indication as
to the flow of goods through production. The flow of goods through production is more evident in Figure 4.3,
which depicts Dinosaur Vinyl as a simple factory with three stages of production.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing  191

Figure 4.3 Factory Layout for Dinosaur Vinyl. The flow of goods and areas of manufacturing versus
administrative costs are more easily seen by looking at the factory layout for Dinosaur Vinyl. The departments
across the bottom represent administrative costs, whereas the departments in the middle represent
manufacturing costs--although Design/Engineering can sometimes be considered part of administrative
costs, depending on how management chooses to categorize those costs. The departments listed across the
top represent examples of manufacturing overhead. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under
CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Raw materials are stored in the materials storeroom and delivered to the appropriate production
department--cutting, painting, or assembly/finishing. The design department uses direct labor to create the
design specifications, and, when completed, it sends them to the production department. The production
department uses the material and design specifications and adds additional labor to create the sign. The sign
is transferred to the finishing department for final materials and labor, before the sign is installed or delivered
to the customer.

Manufacturing Costs

In a manufacturing environment, the manufacturing costs are also called product costs and include all
expenses used to manufacture the product: direct materials, direct labor, and manufacturing overhead. To
review these costs, see Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting. The total of these costs becomes the cost of
ending inventory and later becomes the cost of goods sold when the product is sold. Both job order costing
and process costing use categorized cost information to make decisions and evaluate the effectiveness of the
cost tracking process. Because of the difference in how each of the two costing systems track costs, different
terminology is used. Thus, it is important to separate product costs from period costs, and it is sometimes
important to separate product costs into prime costs and conversion costs. Prime costs are costs that include
192  Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

the primary (or direct) product costs: direct materials and direct labor. Conversion costs are costs that include
the expenses necessary to convert direct materials into a finished product: direct labor and manufacturing
overhead. Their relationship is shown in Figure 4.4.

Figure 4.4 Manufacturing Costs. Management sometimes needs additional information to make decisions
and needs the costs categorized as prime costs or conversion costs. Prime costs and conversion costs are not
included together as direct labor is included in both categories. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Job order costing systems assign costs directly to the product by assigning direct materials and direct labor to
the work in process (WIP) inventory. As you learned in Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting, direct
materials are the components that can be directly traced to the products produced, whereas direct labor is the
labor cost that can be directly traced to the products produced.
Material and labor costs that cannot be traced directly to the product produced are included in the overhead
costs that are allocated in the production costing process. Overhead is applied to each product based on an
activity base, which will be explained in Compute a Predetermined Overhead Rate and Apply Overhead to
Production.
The assignment of direct materials and direct labor to each production unit illustrates the job order costing
system's focus on prime costs, in contrast to the process costing system, which assigns costs to the
department and focuses on direct materials and conversion costs, which are composed of a combination of
direct labor and overhead. Process costs will be demonstrated in Process Costing.

Selling and Administrative Costs

Selling and administrative costs (S&A) are period costs, and these costs are expensed as incurred, instead of
being included in the product's costs, as they move through the relevant inventory accounts. A period cost is a
cost tied to a specific time period, such as a month, quarter, or year, instead of being associated with a
particular job order. For example, if a company paid an insurance company $12,000 for one year's liability
insurance coverage, the first month's expense would be $1,000. This expense would not be related to a
particular job order, but instead would be classified as a period cost, and in this case recorded monthly as an
administrative expense. Selling costs are the expenses related to the promotion and sale of the company's
products, whereas administrative costs are the expenses related to the operations of the company. The S&A

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing                                                                                        193

costs are considered period costs because they include costs of departments not directly associated with
manufacturing but necessary to operate the business. Some examples include research and development
costs, marketing costs, sales commissions, administration building rent, the CEO's salary expense, and
accounting, payroll, and IT department expenses.

   YOUR TURN

   Maria's Market

   A grocery store's analysis of a recent customer survey finds an increasing number of customers
   interested in being able to custom-order meals to go. Maria sees this as an opportunity to enter a niche
   market for busy families or individuals who want home-cooked meals with a variety of options and
   combinations, but who have little time. Maria already has an expansive deli, bakery, and prepared foods
   section in the store and sees this opportunity as a viable option to increase sales and its customer base.
   With meals to go, customers can choose from an array of options and can indicate the quantity of each
   item and the time of pickup. The customer simply pulls up in a designated spot at Maria's and the food is
   brought to their car, packaged, and ready to take home to enjoy.

   What type of costing system will work best for the Maria's Market? What sales price information, cost
   information, and other options are important to this decision?

   Solution

   A job order cost system will work well for this store. In addition to specific price and cost, these are other
   important considerations.

      · The optimal sales price should be set to encourage customers to purchase the meals.
      · The materials, labor, and overhead cost should be considered for each meal option.

              Direct material costs may include the cost of the protein, grain, and vegetable option, as well as
                 the cost of the packing containers.

              The direct labor cost is for employees who are directly involved in preparing the meals.
              Manufacturing overhead includes the cost of gloves used when preparing the meals, the cost of

                 employees who support but are not directly involved in preparing the meals, and the cost to
                 operate the oven.

      · The cost of the various meal options should all be less than the sales price.
      · The meal options should change to take advantage of seasonal items.
      · There may be a need to vary the sales price, depending on the combinations selected.

Recording Costs in Job Order Costing versus Process Costing

Both job order costing and process costing track the costs of materials, labor, and overhead as components of
virtually all products. The process of production does not change because of the costing method: The costing
method is chosen based on the process of production and is intended to provide the most accurate
representation of the costs incurred in the production process.
194                                                                               Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

Maintaining accounting records for each system has its advantages. A job order costing system uses a job cost
sheet to keep track of individual jobs and the direct materials, direct labor, and overhead associated with each
job. The focus of a job order costing system is tracking costs per job, since each job is unique and therefore
has different costs relative to other jobs. Maintaining this information is typically more expensive than process
costing, and it is often used for the production of smaller, more individualized jobs because the benefit of
knowing the cost of each product outweighs the additional cost of maintaining a job order costing system.

In contrast, a process costing system does not need to maintain the cost for individual jobs because the jobs
use a continual system of production, and the items are typically not significantly unique but instead are
basically equivalent. The accounting emphasis is in keeping records for the individual departments, which is
useful for large batches or runs. Process costing is the optimal system to use when the production process is
continuous and when it is difficult to trace a particular input cost to an individual product. Process costing
systems assign costs to each department as the costs are incurred. The costs to produce one unit are
calculated, based on the information from the production department. Therefore, the focus of process costing
systems is on measuring and assigning the conversion costs to the proper department in order to best
determine the cost of individual units.

Under either costing method, accounting theory explains why it is important to understand when costs
become expenses. A primary reason for separating production costs from other company expenses is the
expense recognition principle, which requires costs to be expensed when they match the revenue being
earned and to separate the costs of production from other costs for the proper timing of recognition of
expenses. Think about measuring the profit from the sale of an item, say a TV, in a nonmanufacturing
environment. It is logical to subtract the costs associated with buying the TV in order to determine the profit,
before applying other costs from that sale. Suppose the TV was purchased as inventory by the store in January
and sold to a customer in March. This requires that the cost of the TV not be recorded as an expense (cost of
goods sold) until March, when the sale from the TV is recorded, thus matching the revenue with the expense.
Until that time, the TV and its cost are considered inventory. This same idea applies to the manufacturing
process.

Per the expense recognition principle, product costs--the direct materials, direct labor, and manufacturing
overhead incurred to produce the job--are expensed on the income statement for the period of the sale as
cost of goods sold when the completed job is sold. If the products are not sold, their costs remain in ending
inventory.

Prior to the sale of the product, separating production costs and assigning them to the product results in
these costs remaining with the inventory. Until they are sold, the costs incurred are reflected in an assortment
of inventory accounts, such as raw materials inventory, work in process inventory, and finished goods
inventory.

In contrast, period costs are not directly related to the production process and are expensed during the period
in which they are incurred. This approach matches administrative and other expenses shown on the income
statement in the same period in which the company earns income.

 4.2 Describe and Identify the Three Major Components of Product Costs
under Job Order Costing

In order to set an appropriate sales price for a product, companies need to know how much it costs to produce
an item. Just as a company provides financial statement information to external stakeholders for decision-
making, they must provide costing information to internal managerial decision makers. Virtually every tangible

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing  195

product has direct materials, direct labor, and overhead costs that can include indirect materials and indirect
labor, along with other costs, such as utilities and depreciation on production equipment. To account for these
and inform managers making decisions, the costs are tracked in a cost accounting system.

While the flow of costs is generally the same for all costing systems, the difference is in the details: Product
costs have material, labor, and overhead costs, which may be assessed differently. In most production
facilities, the raw materials are moved from the raw materials inventory into the work in process inventory.
The work in process involves one or more production departments and is where labor and overhead convert
the raw materials into finished goods. The movement of these costs through the work in process inventory is
shown in Figure 4.5.

Figure 4.5 Work in Process Inventory. Direct materials, direct labor, and manufacturing overhead enter the
work in process inventory as the costs associated with the products that are in production. Once the products
are completed, their costs are transferred to the finished goods inventory. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

At this stage, the completed products are transferred into the finished goods inventory account. When the
product is sold, the costs move from the finished goods inventory into the cost of goods sold.

While many types of production processes could be demonstrated, let's consider an example in which a
contractor is building a home for a client. The accounting system will track direct materials, such as lumber,
and direct labor, such as the wages paid to the carpenters constructing the home. Along with these direct
materials and labor, the project will incur manufacturing overhead costs, such as indirect materials, indirect
labor, and other miscellaneous overhead costs. Samples of these costs include indirect materials, such as nails,
indirect labor, such as the supervisor's salary, assuming that the supervisor is overseeing several projects at
the same time, and miscellaneous overhead costs such as depreciation on the equipment used in the
construction project.

As direct materials, direct labor, and overhead are introduced into the production process, they become part
of the work in process inventory value. When the home is completed, the accumulated costs become part of
the finished goods inventory value, and when the home is sold, the finished goods value of the home becomes
the cost of goods sold. Figure 4.6 illustrates the flow of these costs through production.
196  Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

Figure 4.6 Flow of Materials from Raw Materials to Finished Goods. Accounting methods track a product's
material, labor, and overhead costs, as it moves through production. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

The three general categories of costs included in manufacturing processes are direct materials, direct labor,
and overhead. Note that there are a few exceptions, since some service industries do not have direct material
costs, and some automated manufacturing companies do not have direct labor costs. For example, a tax
accountant could use a job order costing system during tax season to trace costs. The one major difference
between the home builder example and this one is that the tax accountant will not have direct material costs
to track. The few assets used will typically be categorized as overhead.
A benefit of knowing the production costs for each job in a job order costing system is the ability to set
appropriate sales prices based on all the production costs, including direct materials, direct labor, and
overhead. The unique nature of the products manufactured in a job order costing system makes setting a
price even more difficult. For each job, management typically wants to set the price higher than its production
cost. Even if management is willing to price the product as a loss leader, they still need to know how much
money will be lost on each product. To achieve this, management needs an accounting system that can
accurately assign and document the costs for each product.
If you're not familiar with the concept of a loss leader, a simple example might help clarify the concept. A loss
leader is a product that is sold at a price that is often less than the cost of producing it in order to entice you to
buy accessories that are necessary for its use. For example, you might pay $50 or $60 for a printer (for which
the producer probably does not make any profit) in order to then sell you extremely expensive printer
cartridges that only print a few pages before they have to be replaced. However, even pricing a product as a
loss leader requires analysis of the three categories of costs: direct materials, direct labor, and overhead.

Direct Materials

Direct materials are those materials that can be directly traced to the manufacturing of the product. Some
examples of direct materials for different industries are shown in Table 4.2. In order to respond quickly to
production needs, companies need raw materials inventory on hand. While production volume might change,
management does not want to stop production to wait for raw materials to be delivered. Further, a company
needs raw materials on hand for future jobs as well as for the current job. The materials are sent to the
production department as it is needed for production of the products.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing                                                                                 197

               Industry      Common Direct Materials by Industry
Automotive                                                           Direct Materials
Cell phones
Furniture                    Iron, aluminum, glass, rubber
Jewelry                      Glass, various metals, plastic
Pharmaceuticals              Wood, leather, vinyl
                             Gold, silver, diamonds, rubies
                             Natural or synthetic biological ingredients

Table 4.2

Each job begins when raw materials are put into the work in process inventory. When the materials are
requested for production, a materials requisition slip is completed and shows the exact items and quantity
requested, along with the associated cost. The completed form is signed by the requestor and approved by the
manager responsible for the budget.

Returning to the example of Dinosaur Vinyl's order for Macs & Cheese's stadium sign, Figure 4.7 shows the
materials requisition form for Job MAC001. This form indicates the quantity and specific items to be put into
the work in process. It also transfers the cost of those items to the work in process inventory and decreases
the raw materials inventory by the same amount. The raw materials inventory department maintains a copy to
document the change in inventory levels, and the accounting department maintains a copy to properly assign
the costs to the particular job.

Figure 4.7 Materials Requisition Form for Job MAC001. The materials requisition form allows different
departments to track and account for the direct materials needed to manufacture the product. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
198  Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

Dinosaur Vinyl has a beginning inventory of $1,000 in raw materials: vinyl, and $300 in each of its ink
inventories: raw materials: black ink, raw materials: red ink, and raw materials: gold ink. In order to have enough
inventory on hand for all of its jobs, it purchases $10,000 in vinyl and $500 in black ink. The T-accounts in
Figure 4.8 show the stated beginning debit balances. An additional $10,000 of vinyl and $500 of black ink were
then purchased for anticipated use, providing the demonstrated final account balances. The red ink and gold
ink balances did not change, since no additional quantities were purchased.

The beginning balances and purchases in each of these accounts are illustrated in Figure 4.8.

Figure 4.8 Beginning Balances and Purchases. These T-accounts show the balances for the raw materials
inventory. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Traditional billboards with the design printed on vinyl include direct materials of vinyl and printing ink, plus the
framing materials, which consist of wood and grommets. The typical billboard sign is 14 feet high by 48 feet
wide, and Dinosaur Vinyl incurs a vinyl cost of $300 per billboard. The price for the ink varies by color. For this
job, Dinosaur Vinyl needs two units of black ink at a cost of $50 each, one unit of red ink and one unit of gold
ink at a cost of $60 each, twelve grommets at a cost of $10 each, and forty units of wood at a cost of $1.50 per
unit. The total cost of direct materials is $700, as shown in Figure 4.9.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing  199

Figure 4.9 Direct Materials Needed for Job MAC001. The costs for direct materials needed by both the
production and finishing departments are shown. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Some items are more difficult to measure per unit, such as adhesives and other materials not directly
traceable to the final product. Their costs are assigned to the product as part of manufacturing overhead as
indirect materials.

When Dinosaur Vinyl requests materials to complete Job MAC001, the materials are moved from raw materials
inventory to work in process inventory. We will use the beginning inventory balances in the accounts that were
provided earlier in the example. The requisition is recorded on the job cost sheet along with the cost of the
materials transferred. The costs assigned to job MAC001 are $300 in vinyl, $100 in black ink, $60 in red ink, and
$60 in gold ink. During the finishing stages, $120 in grommets and $60 in wood are requisitioned and put into
work in process inventory. The costs are tracked from the materials requisition form to the work in process
inventory and noted specifically as part of Job MAC001 on the preceding job order cost sheet. The movement
of goods is illustrated in Figure 4.10.
200  Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

Figure 4.10 Movement of Goods. These T-accounts illustrate the tracking of costs from raw materials
inventory to the work in process inventory as the product moves through the manufacturing process.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Each of the T-accounts traces the movement of the raw materials from inventory to work in process. The vinyl
and ink were used first to print the billboard, and then the billboard went to the finishing department for the
grommets and frame, which were moved to work in process after the vinyl and ink. The final T-account shows
the total cost for the raw materials placed into work in process on April 2 (vinyl and ink) and on April 14
(grommets and wood). The journal entries to reflect the flow of costs from raw materials to work in process to
finished goods are provided in the section describing how to Prepare Journal Entries for a Job Order Cost
System.

Direct Labor

Direct labor is the total cost of wages, payroll taxes, payroll benefits, and similar expenses for the individuals
who work directly on manufacturing a particular product. The direct labor costs for Dinosaur Vinyl to complete
Job MAC001 occur in the production and finishing departments. In the production department, two individuals

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing  201

each work one hour at a rate of $15 per hour, including taxes and benefits. The finishing department's direct
labor involves two individuals working one hour each at a rate of $18 per hour. Figure 4.11 shows the direct
labor costs for Job MAC001.

Figure 4.11 Direct Labor for Job MAC001. Labor costs account for individuals working directly on the
product. Individuals whose contributions are indirect will be tracked under manufacturing overhead.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Job MAC001 is also manufactured with the work of individuals whose contributions cannot be directly traced to
the product: These indirect labor costs are assigned to the product as part of manufacturing overhead.

A company can use various methods to trace employee wages to specific jobs. For example, employees may fill
out time tickets that include job numbers and time per job, or workers may scan bar codes of specific jobs
when they begin a job task. Figure 4.12 shows what time tickets might look like on Job MAC001. Please note
that in the employee time tickets that are displayed, each employee worked on more than one job. However,
we are only going to track the expenses for Job MAC001.
202  Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

Figure 4.12 Employee Time Tickets. Time tickets (or time cards) are one method a company can use to track
direct labor costs per individual and per job. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-
NC-SA 4.0 license)
When the accounting department processes time tickets, the costs are assigned to the individual jobs,
resulting in labor costs being recorded on the work in process inventory, as shown in Figure 4.13.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing  203

Figure 4.13 Costs Accounted for in the Work in Process Inventory. The direct material costs of $520 and
$180, and the direct labor costs of $30 and $36 assigned to Job MAC001 are shown. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Manufacturing Overhead

Recall that the costs of a manufactured item are direct materials, direct labor, and manufacturing overhead.
Costs that support production but are not direct materials or direct labor are considered overhead.
Manufacturing overhead has three components: indirect materials, indirect labor, and overhead.

Indirect Materials

Indirect material costs are derived from the goods not directly traced to the finished product, like the sign
adhesive in the Dinosaur Vinyl example. Tracking the exact amount of adhesive used would be difficult, time
consuming, and expensive, so it makes more sense to classify this cost as an indirect material.

Indirect materials are materials used in production but not traced to specific products because the net
informational value from the time and effort to trace the cost to each individual product produced is
impossible or inefficient. For example, a furniture factory classifies the cost of glue, stain, and nails as indirect
materials. Nails are often used in furniture production; however, one chair may need 15 nails, whereas another
may need 18 nails. At a cost of less than one cent per nail, it is not worth keeping track of each nail per
product. It is much more practical to track how many pounds of nails were used for the period and allocate
this cost (along with other costs) to the overhead costs of the finished products.

Indirect Labor

Indirect labor represents the labor costs of those employees associated with the manufacturing process, but
whose contributions are not directly traceable to the final product. These would include the costs of the factory
floor supervisor, the factory housekeeping staff, and factory maintenance workers. For Dinosaur Vinyl, for
example, labor costs for the technician who maintains the printers would be indirect labor. It would be too
time consuming to determine how much of the technician's time is attributable to each sign being produced.
It makes much more sense to classify that labor expense as indirect labor.

It is important to understand that the allocation of costs may vary from company to company. What may be a
direct labor cost for one company may be an indirect labor cost for another company or even for another
department within the same company. Deciding whether the expense is direct or indirect depends on its task.
If the employee's work can be directly tied to the product, it is direct labor. If it is tied to the factory but not to
the product, it is indirect labor. If it is tied to the marketing department, it is a sales and administrative
expense, and not included in the cost of the product. For example, salaries of factory employees assembling
parts are direct labor, salaries of factory employees performing maintenance are indirect labor, and salaries of
employees in the marketing department are sales and administration expenses.
204                                                                               Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

Overhead

The last category of manufacturing overhead is the overhead itself. These costs are necessary for production
but not efficient to assign to individual product production. Examples of typical overhead costs are production
facility electricity, warehouse rent, and depreciation of equipment.

But note that while production facility electricity costs are treated as overhead, the organization's
administrative facility electrical costs are not included as as overhead costs. Instead, they are treated as period
costs, as office rent or insurance would be.

When both administrative and production activities occur in a common building, the production and period
costs would be allocated in some predetermined manner. For example, if a 10,000 square foot building were
physically allocated at 4,000 square feet for administrative purposes and 6,000 square feet for production, a
company might allocate its annual $30,000 property tax expense on a 40%/60% basis, or $12,000 as a period
cost for the administrative offices and a production (overhead) cost of $18,000.

     LINK TO LEARNING

     Do you know of a restaurant that was doing really well until it moved into a larger space? Often this
     happens because the owners thought their profits could handle the costs of the increased space.
     Unfortunately, they were not really aware of the production costs. Keeping track of product costs is
     critical for pricing and cost control. Read advice from restaurant owner John Gutekanst about the
     importance of understanding food costs (https://openstax.org/l/50pizza) and his approach to account
     for these in his pizzeria.

Accounting for Manufacturing Overhead

In all costing systems, the expense recognition principle requires costs to be recorded in the period in which
they are incurred. The costs are expensed when matched to the revenue with which they are associated; this is
commonly referred to as having the expenses follow the revenues. This explains why raw material purchases are
not assigned to the job until the materials are requested. When companies use an inventory account, the
product costs are expensed when the inventory is sold. It is common to have an item produced in one year,
such as 2017, and expensed as cost of goods sold in a later year, such as 2018. In addition to the previously
mentioned revenue recognition treatment, this treatment is justified under GAAP's matching principle. If the
inventory has not been sold, the company has an inventory asset rather than an expense.

The expense recognition principle also applies to manufacturing overhead costs. The manufacturing overhead
is an expense of production, even though the company is unable to trace the costs directly to each specific job.
For example, the electricity needed to run production equipment typically is not easily traced to a particular
product or job, yet it is still a cost of production. As a cost of production, the electricity--one type of
manufacturing overhead--becomes a cost of the product and part of inventory costs until the product or job is
sold. Fortunately, the accounting system keeps track of the manufacturing overhead, which is then applied to
each individual job in the overhead allocation process.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing  205

   ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

   Ethical Job Order Costing

   Job order costing requires the assignment of direct materials, direct labor, and overhead to each
   production unit. The primary focus on costs allows some leeway in recording amounts because the
   accountant assigns the costs. When jobs are billed on a cost-plus-fee basis, management may be
   tempted to overcharge the cost of the job. Cost-based contracts may include a guaranteed maximum,
   time and materials, or cost reimbursable contract. An example is the design and delivery of a corporate
   training program. The training company may charge for the hours worked by instructors in preparation
   and delivery of the course, plus a fee for the course materials.

   One major issue in all of these contracts is adding too much overhead cost and fraudulent invoicing for
   unused materials or unperformed work by subcontractors. Management might be tempted to direct the
   accountant to avoid the appearance of going over the original estimate by manipulating job order
   costing. It is the accountant's job to ensure that the amounts recorded in the accounting system fairly
   represent the economic activity of the company, and the fair and proper allocation of costs.

Managers use the information in the manufacturing overhead account to estimate the overhead for the next
fiscal period. This estimated overhead needs to be as close to the actual value as possible, so that the
allocation of costs to individual products can be accurate and the sales price can be properly determined.

Properly allocating overhead to the individual jobs depends on finding a cost driver that provides a fair basis
for the allocation. A cost driver is a production factor that causes a company to incur costs. An example would
be a bakery that produces a line of apple pies that it markets to local restaurants. To make the pies requires
that the bakery incur labor costs, so it is safe to say that pie production is a cost driver. It should also be safe to
assume that the more pies made, the greater the number of labor hours experienced (also assuming that
direct labor has not been replaced with a greater amount of automation). We assume, in this case, that one of
the marketing advantages that the bakery advertises is 100% handmade pastries.

In traditional costing systems, the most common activities used as cost drivers are direct labor in dollars,
direct labor in hours, or machine hours. Often in the production process, there is a correlation between an
increase in the amount of direct labor used and an increase in the amount of manufacturing overhead
incurred. If the company can demonstrate such a relationship, they then often allocate overhead based on a
formula that reflects this relationship, such as the upcoming equation. In the case of the earlier bakery, the
company could determine an overhead allocation amount based on each hour of direct labor or, in other
cases, based on the ratio of anticipated total direct labor costs to total manufacturing overhead costs.

For example, assume that the company estimates total manufacturing overhead for the year to be $400,000
and the direct labor costs for the year to be $200,000. This relationship would lead to $2.00 of applied
overhead for each $1.00 of direct labor incurred. The manufacturing overhead cost can be calculated and
applied to each specific job, based on the direct labor costs. The formula that represents the overhead
allocation relationship is shown, and it is the formula for overhead allocation:
206                                                                               Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

For example, Dinosaur Vinyl determined that the direct labor cost is the appropriate driver to use when
establishing an overhead rate. The estimated annual overhead cost for Dinosaur Vinyl is $250,000. The total
direct labor cost is estimated to be $100,000, so the allocation rate is computed as shown:

Since the direct labor expense for MAC001 is $66, the overhead allocated is $66 times the overhead application
rate of $2.50 per direct labor dollar, or $165, as shown:

Figure 4.14 shows the journal entry to record the overhead allocation.

Figure 4.14  Overhead Allocation. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
license)

     THINK IT THROUGH

     Franchise or Unique Venture?

     You are deciding whether to purchase a pizza franchise or open your own restaurant specializing in
     pizza. List the expenses necessary to sell pizza and identify them as a fixed cost or variable cost; as a
     manufacturing cost or sales and administrative costs; and as a direct materials, direct labor, or overhead.
     For each overhead item, state whether it is an indirect material expense, indirect labor expense, or other.
     For each cost, identify its origination in a job order costing environment.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing  207

 4.3 Use the Job Order Costing Method to Trace the Flow of Product Costs
through the Inventory Accounts

Job order costing can be used for many different industries, and each industry maintains records for one or
more inventory accounts. The manufacturing industry keeps track of the costs of each inventory account as
the product is moved from raw materials inventory into work in process, through work in process, and into the
finished goods inventory.

Conversely, typical companies in the merchandising industry sell products they do not manufacture and
purchase their inventory in an already completed state. It is relatively easy to keep track of the inventory cost
for a merchandising company through its application of first-in/first-out (FIFO), last-in/last-out (LIFO),
weighted average, or specific identification inventory techniques on the unsold items. The primary difference
in the four methods is the valuation of the cost of goods sold and the remaining ending inventory valuation,
assuming that the company did not sell 100% of the inventory that they had available for sale during a given
period. Companies are allowed to choose the method that they feel best represents their cost flows through
their cost of goods sold and their ending inventory balances.

Not all service companies have inventory, and those companies do not have direct materials nor do they
consider their work in process their inventory, since their final product is often an intangible asset, such as a
legal document or tax return. Regardless of whether the service has inventory accounts, service companies all
keep track of the direct labor and overhead costs incurred while completing each job in progress.

Inventory is an asset reported on the balance sheet, and each company needs to maintain accurate records for
the cost of each type of inventory: raw materials inventory, work in process inventory, and finished goods
inventory. All three costs are computed in a similar manner. You can see in Figure 4.15 that the general format
is the same for maintaining all accounts, whether the company uses a job order, process, or hybrid cost
system.
208  Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

Figure 4.15 Cost of Inventory Accounts. Inventory is accounted for across the flow through production.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Each inventory account starts with a beginning balance at the start of an accounting period. During the period,
if additional inventory is purchased, the new inventory amount is added to the beginning balance to calculate
the total inventory available for use or sale. The ending inventory balance at the end of the accounting period
can then be subtracted from the inventory available for use, and the total represents the cost of the inventory
used during the period.
For example, if the beginning inventory balance were $400, and the company bought an additional $1,000, it
would have $1,400 of inventory available for use. If the ending inventory balance were $500, the amount of
inventory used during the period would be $900 ($400 + $1,000 = $1,400 - $500 = $900).

Raw Materials Inventory

Raw materials inventory is the total cost of materials that will be used in the production process. Usually,
several accounts make up the raw materials inventory, and these can be actual accounts or accounts
subsidiary to the general raw materials inventory account. In our example, Dinosaur Vinyl has several raw
materials accounts: vinyl, red ink, black ink, gold ink, grommets, and wood.
Within the raw materials inventory account, purchases increase the inventory, whereas raw materials sent into
production reduce it. It is easy to reconcile the amount of ending inventory and the cost of direct materials
used in production, since the materials requisition form (Figure 4.7) keeps track of the inventory requested
and sent into each specific job. Since the costs are transferred with production, the calculation shows the

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing              209

amount of materials used in production:

Work in Process Inventory

In a job order cost system, the balance in the work in process inventory account is continually updated as job
costs are recorded and is the total of all unfinished jobs, as shown on the individual job cost sheets.
The production cycle is a continuous cycle that begins with raw materials being transferred to work in process,
moving through production, and ending as finished goods inventory. Typically, as goods are being produced,
additional jobs are being started and finished, and the work in process inventory includes unit costs of jobs still
in production at the end of the accounting period. At the end of the accounting cycle, there will be jobs that
remain unfinished in the production cycle, and these represent the work in process inventory. The costs on the
job order cost sheet help reconcile the cost of the items transferred to the finished goods inventory and the
cost of the work in process inventory.
For example, Dinosaur Vinyl has completed Job MAC001. The total cost of $931 is transferred to the finished
goods inventory:

At this point, we need to examine an important component of the costing process. The cost of goods
manufactured (COGM) is the costs of all of the units that a company completed and transferred to the
finished goods inventory during an accounting period. Obviously, the cost of goods manufactured is not just a
single number that can be pulled from one location. We have to look at all costs included in the manufacturing
process to determine the cost of goods manufactured. The calculation begins with the beginning balance in
the work in process inventory, incorporates the new production costs incurred during the current period
(typically a year), and then subtracts the ending balance in the work in process inventory since these costs will
be included in the subsequent accounting period's cost of goods manufactured, as shown:
210  Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

Finished Goods Inventory

After each job has been completed and overhead has been applied, the product is transferred to the finished
goods inventory where it stays until it is sold. As each job is transferred, the costs are summarized and
transferred as well, and the job cost sheet is completed to show the actual production cost of the product and
the sales price of the items produced.
A job order cost system continually updates each job cost sheet as materials, labor, and overhead are added.
As a result, all inventory accounts are constantly maintained. The materials inventory balance is continually
updated, as materials are purchased and requisitioned for individual jobs. The work in process inventory and
finished goods inventory are master accounts, and their balances are determined by adding the total of the
job cost sheets. The total of the incomplete jobs becomes the total work in process inventory, and the total of
the completed and unsold jobs becomes the total of the finished goods inventory.
Similar to the raw materials and work in process inventories, the cost of goods sold can be calculated as
shown:

Cost of Goods Sold

The cost of goods sold is the manufacturing cost of the items sold during the period. It is calculated by adding
the beginning finished goods inventory and the cost of goods manufactured to arrive at the cost of goods
available for sale. The cost of goods available for sale less the ending inventory results in the cost of goods
sold.
In our example, when the sale has occurred, the goods are transferred to the buyer, and the product is
transferred from the finished goods inventory to the cost of goods sold. A corresponding entry is also made to
record the sale. Dinosaur Vinyl's sales price for Job MAC001 was $2,000, and its cost of goods sold was $931:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing                        211

Figure 4.16 shows the flow to cost of goods sold.

Figure 4.16 Flow of Manufacturing Costs under the Job Order Costing Method. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

   YOUR TURN

   Tracking the Flow with Selected T-Accounts

   Use the transaction letters to show the flow in and out of the T-accounts. Note: some items may be used
   more than once. Also, not every possible T-account entry is required in this exercise. For example, for the
   purchase of raw materials, the credit entry for either cash or accounts payable is not required.
212                                                                               Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

      A. Purchase raw materials inventory
      B. Factory wage expense incurred
      C. Issue raw materials inventory to Job P33
      D. Factory wage allocated to Job P33
      E. Factory wage allocated to overhead
      F. Job P33 completed
      G. Job P33 sold

     Solution

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing  213

 4.4 Compute a Predetermined Overhead Rate and Apply Overhead to
Production

Job order cost systems maintain the actual direct materials and direct labor for each individual job. Since
production consists of overhead--indirect materials, indirect labor, and other overhead--we need a
methodology for applying that overhead. Unfortunately, the nature of indirect material, indirect labor, and
other overhead expenses makes it impossible to determine the exact amount of overhead for each specific
job. For example, how do you know the cost of electricity and heat for manufacturing one job? And, if you did,
is it fair to say products manufactured in January are more expensive than the same product manufactured in
March because of heat expense?

Fundamental Characteristics of the Overhead Determination Environment

Added to these issues is the nature of establishing an overhead rate, which is often completed months before
being applied to specific jobs. Establishing the overhead allocation rate first requires management to identify
which expenses they consider manufacturing overhead and then to estimate the manufacturing overhead for
the next year. Manufacturing overhead costs include all manufacturing costs except for direct materials and
direct labor. Therefore, in order to estimate manufacturing overhead, management must estimate the future
purchase prices of dozens, or sometimes hundreds, of individual components, such as utilities, raw materials,
contract labor, or diesel fuel. Estimating overhead costs is difficult because many costs fluctuate significantly
from when the overhead allocation rate is established to when its actual application occurs during the
production process. You can envision the potential problems in creating an overhead allocation rate within
these circumstances.

Before demonstrating the calculation of a predetermined overhead allocation rate, let's review the basic
principles of revenue recognition and expense. In accounting, there are three ways to recognize expenses:

 1. Direct relationship between the expense and the associated revenue. This method is used for many costs,
      and the expense is recognized when a direct relationship exists. For example, sales commission expenses
      can be directly traced to product sales, and a commission expense is recorded when a sale is made.

 2. Systematic and rational allocation of expenses. This approach is used when costs exist and there is an
      expected benefit, even though the costs cannot be directly traced to the benefit. The assigning of
      expenses to a product or time period must be done in an objective and consistent manner. Examples of
      such expenses would include equipment rental for a factory or property insurance for the factory.
      Both of these expenses (direct relationship and systematic and rational) are also examples of the types of
      expenses that compose manufacturing overhead. An example of the current revenue recognition
      principle is a company paying $4,800 a year for property insurance. Since production rates can vary
      month to month, most producers would allocate $400 each month for property insurance, and this cost
      would be incorporated into the total overhead costs anticipated when estimating a manufacturing
      overhead allocation rate.
      The direct benefit is that the product will be sold and the revenue recognized. The overhead is associated
      but cannot be directly traced to an individual product, so the overhead expenses need to be assigned in a
      systematic and rational manner.

 3. Immediate recognition. This method is used when expenses exist but there is no direct expected benefit.
      In this case, the expense is recognized immediately. For example, research and development costs are
      necessary expenses but cannot be traced to a specific product, so they are expensed as incurred.
214                                                                               Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

The allocation of overhead to the cost of the product is also recognized in a systematic and rational manner.
The expected overhead is estimated, and an allocation system is determined. The actual costs are accumulated
in a manufacturing overhead account. The overhead is then applied to the cost of the product from the
manufacturing overhead account. The overhead used in the allocation is an estimate due to the timing
considerations already discussed.

The application rate that will be used in a coming period, such as the next year, is often estimated months
before the actual overhead costs are experienced. Often, the actual overhead costs experienced in the coming
period are higher or lower than those budgeted when the estimated overhead rate or rates were determined.
At this point, do not be concerned about the accuracy of the future financial statements that will be created
using these estimated overhead allocation rates. You will learn in Determine and Disposed of Underapplied or
Overapplied Overhead how to adjust for the difference between the allocated amount and the actual amount.

Despite improvements in technology and information flow, using the actual overhead to calculate the
application rate is usually not possible because the actual overhead information is available too late for
management to make decisions. Also, as you will learn, the results of the actual overhead costs, if they were
available, could be misleading. Therefore, most manufacturing companies use predetermined overhead rates
for these reasons:

  · Overhead costs are not uniform throughout the year. An example is electricity costs that vary by weather
      and time of day.

  · Some overhead costs are fixed, and the cost per unit varies with production. For example, rent may be
      $1,000 per month. If 500 units were made during one month, and 2,000 units were made the next month,
      the cost per unit would vary from $2 per unit to $0.50 per unit.

  · The total number of units produced varies and is often known sooner than the cost of overhead. For
      example, a company may know it will have a contract to produce 100 custom units long before it knows
      the utility costs for the next year.

As previously described, a predetermined overhead rate is established prior to the beginning of the fiscal year
and typically is not changed during the year. The predetermined rate is calculated as shown and is used to
apply overhead costs to work in process:

     CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

     Overhead in the Movie Industry

     The movie industry uses job order costing, and studios need to allocate overhead to each movie. Their
     amount of allocated overhead is not publicly known because while publications share how much money
     a movie has produced in ticket sales, it is rare that the actual expenses are released to the public.
     It has been speculated that Star Wars: The Force Awakens cost $201,000,000, with $30,000,000 considered
     overhead. Studios have estimated that the higher the movie expenses, the more studio overhead is
     required, and it has also been estimated that 10% of the total cost is assigned to studio overhead.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing  215

Determining Estimated Overhead Cost

The estimated or budgeted overhead is the amount of overhead determined during the budgeting process
and consists of manufacturing costs but, as you have learned, excludes direct materials and direct labor.
Examples of manufacturing overhead costs include indirect materials, indirect labor, manufacturing utilities,
and manufacturing equipment depreciation. Another way to view it is overhead costs are those production
costs that are not categorized as direct materials or direct labor.

Selecting an Estimated Activity Base

As you have learned, the overhead needs to be allocated to the manufactured product in a systematic and
rational manner. This allocation process depends on the use of a cost driver, which drives the production
activity's cost. Examples can include labor hours incurred, labor costs paid, amounts of materials used in
production, units produced, or any other activity that has a cause-and-effect relationship with incurred costs.

Direct labor hours, direct labor dollars, or machine hours are often chosen as the allocation base because
those costs are associated with each product, and as the activity increases, so does the manufacturing
overhead. In other words, the products that involve more direct labor hours, direct labor dollars, or machine
hours also increase utility expenses, supervisor time (and thus indirect labor), equipment usage and the
related depreciation expense, and so forth.

Traditionally, direct labor hours were used as the activity base, but technology continually decreases the
amount of direct labor used in production, and machine hours or units produced have become more common
activity bases. Management analyzes the costs and selects the activity as the estimated activity base because
it drives the overhead costs of the unit.

Computing a Predetermined Overhead Rate

Dinosaur Vinyl uses the expenses from the prior two years to estimate the overhead for the upcoming year to
be $250,000, as shown in Figure 4.17.

Figure 4.17 Dinosaur Vinyl's Estimated Overhead. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under
CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Dinosaur Vinyl also used its payroll records to estimate that it will spend $100,000 on direct labor. Using the
predetermined overhead rate calculation, the overhead rate is $2.50 per direct labor dollar:

Over the fiscal year, the actual costs are recorded as debits into the account called manufacturing overhead.
When the overhead is applied to the jobs, the amount is first calculated using the application rate. If the total
216  Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

labor paid for the job is $66, the overhead applied to the job is $2.50 times that amount, or $165. The entry to
record the overhead for Job MAC001 is:

That amount is added to the cost of the job, and the amount in the manufacturing overhead account is
reduced by the same amount. At the end of the year, the amount of overhead estimated and applied should
be close, although it is rare for the applied amount to exactly equal the actual overhead. For example,
Figure 4.18 shows the monthly costs, the annual actual cost, and the estimated overhead for Dinosaur Vinyl for
the year. While the total amounts are close to each other, they are not exact.

Figure 4.18 Dinosaur Vinyl's Actual and Estimated Overhead. While the total amounts are close to each
other, they are not an exact match. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
license)

Calculating Manufacturing Overhead Cost for an Individual Job

Figure 4.18 shows the monthly manufacturing actual overhead recorded by Dinosaur Vinyl. As explained
previously, the overhead is allocated to the individual jobs at the predetermined overhead rate of $2.50 per
direct labor dollar when the jobs are complete. When Job MAC001 is completed, overhead is $165, computed
as $2.50 times the $66 of direct labor, with the total job cost of $931, which includes $700 for direct materials,
$66 for direct labor, and $165 for manufacturing overhead.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Companies need to make certain the sales price is higher than the prime costs and the overhead costs.
   This can be a difficult task in industries in which overhead costs change. In some industries, the company
   has no control over the costs it must pay, like tire disposal fees. To ensure that the company is profitable,
   an additional cost is added and the price is modified as necessary. In this example, the guarantee offered
   by Discount Tire (https://openstax.org/l/50tireguarantee) does not include the disposal fee in overhead
   and increases that fee as necessary.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing  217

 4.5 Compute the Cost of a Job Using Job Order Costing

To summarize the job order cost system, the cost of each job includes direct materials, direct labor, and
manufacturing overhead. While the product is in production, the direct materials and direct labor costs are
included in the work in process inventory. The direct materials are requested by the production department,
and the direct material cost is directly attached to each individual job, as the materials are released from raw
materials inventory. The cost of direct labor is recorded by the employees and assigned to each individual job.
When the allocation base is known, usually when the product is completed, the overhead is allocated to the
product on the basis of the predetermined overhead rate.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   The construction industry typically uses job order costing and accounts for its costing
   (https://openstax.org/l/50construction) in a manner similar to the businesses profiled in this chapter.

Determining the Costs of an Individual Job Using Job Order Costing

When a job is completed, the costs of the job--the direct materials, direct labor, and manufacturing
overhead--are totaled on the job cost sheet, and the total amount is transferred to finished goods at the same
time the product is transferred, either physically or legally, such as in the case of a home built by a contractor.
Finally, when the product is sold, the sale is recorded at the sale price, while the cost is transferred from
finished goods inventory to the cost of goods sold expense account. Figure 4.19 shows the flow of costs from
raw materials inventory to cost of goods sold.

Figure 4.19 Flow of Costs during Production and Ultimate Sale or Transfer of Ownership. (credit "Raw
Materials Inventory," "Work in Process Inventory," "Finished Goods Inventory": modifications of "160810-F-
UY190-027.JPG," "160810-F-UY190-073.JPG," and "160810-F-UY190-105.JPG" by Jessica Weissman, Minot Air
Force Base Public Affairs, Public Domain; credit Cost of Goods Sold": "Rustic Sign" by Grace Byrd/Flickr, CC BY
2.0)

At all points in the process, the work in process should include the cost of direct materials and direct labor.
When the job is completed and overhead assigned, the overhead allocation increases the cost of the work in
process inventory. The cost of each individual job is maintained on a job cost sheet, and the total of all the
work in process job cost sheets equals the work in process inventory and the statement of cost of goods
218  Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

manufactured, as you have learned.

A job cost sheet is a subsidiary ledger that identifies the individual costs for each job. Figure 4.20 shows the job
cost sheet for Job MAC001.

Figure 4.20 Job Cost Sheet for Job MAC001. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-
NC-SA 4.0 license)

Sample Cost Information for Dinosaur Vinyl

Dinosaur Vinyl worked on three jobs during the month: POR143, MAC001, and TRJ441, and a fourth Job
SWM505 had been finished and moved to the finished goods inventory account during the previous month.
At the beginning of the month, the company had a beginning raw materials inventory balance of $2,500, and
during the month, it purchased an additional $10,500, giving it a total of $13,000 in raw materials available for
use in production.
The following example will examine four different production jobs. Each of the four will be at beginning stages
at either the beginning of the current month or the end of the current month.

 1. Job POR 143: This job was the only work in process inventory at the beginning of the current month, and it
      had $1,000 in direct material costs, and $0 of direct labor costs already allocated to the work in process
      inventory. During the current month, additional direct materials of $200 and direct labor of $150 were
      added to POR143. An overhead cost of $375 was applied to POR143 at the predetermined overhead rate
      of $2.50 per direct labor dollar. It was finished during the month and transferred to the finished goods
      inventory. The sale was not finalized during the month, so it continues to be part of the finished goods
      inventory.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing                                                            219

 2. Job MAC 001: This job was started and completed during the month. Since the job began in and was
      completed in the same month, there was no beginning balance in the work in process inventory. During
      the month it incurred $700 in direct materials costs, $66 in direct labor, and $165 of overhead applied to
      the job before it was transferred to the finished goods inventory upon completion. The sale was finalized
      during the month at a sale price of $2,000, so the costs were transferred from finished goods inventory to
      cost of goods sold.

 3. Job TRJ441: This job was started during the current month. Its costs consist of $500 in direct material cost,
      $150 in direct labor expenses, and $375 in applied overhead. The job remains in the work in process
      inventory awaiting assembly.

 4. Job SWM505: At the beginning of the month, this job was completed and already in the finished goods
      inventory at a cost of $1,531. Since it was completed, it did not incur any additional costs in the current
      month. It was sold during the month for $3,500, and the costs were transferred from the finished goods
      inventory to cost of goods sold.

The cost of raw materials used is calculated as shown:

The individual job cost sheets show the $1,400 worth of materials used in production:
The cost of goods manufactured is accounted for as shown:

Notice the costs for Job TJR441 are included in the work in process inventory, whereas the costs for POR143
and MAC001 were transferred to the cost of goods manufactured. The costs of the jobs transferred are shown
in the cost of goods sold and the finished goods inventory:
220  Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

Mechanics of Job Order Costing for Dinosaur Vinyl

The amounts in raw materials, work in process, and finished goods inventories compose the total cost for each
account, whereas the job cost sheets contain the costs for each individual job. A summary of the jobs for
Dinosaur Vinyl is given in Figure 4.21.

Figure 4.21 Summary of Dinosaur Vinyl's Jobs during the Year. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

   THINK IT THROUGH
   Allocating Costs

   A manufacturing company has incurred these costs:

   What is the cost allocated to Job A? For any costs not used, explain why they are not used.

 4.6 Determine and Dispose of Underapplied or Overapplied Overhead

As you've learned, the actual overhead incurred during the year is rarely equal to the amount that was applied
to the individual jobs. Thus, at year-end, the manufacturing overhead account often has a balance, indicating
overhead was either overapplied or underapplied.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing                                                                                221

If, at the end of the term, there is a debit balance in manufacturing overhead, the overhead is considered
underapplied overhead. A debit balance in manufacturing overhead shows either that not enough overhead
was applied to the individual jobs or overhead was underapplied. If, at the end of the term, there is a credit
balance in manufacturing overhead, more overhead was applied to jobs than was actually incurred. This shows
the actual amount was overapplied overhead.

The actual overhead costs are recorded through a debit to manufacturing overhead. The same account is
credited when overhead is applied to the individual jobs in production, as shown:

Since the overhead is first recorded in the manufacturing overhead account, then applied to the individual
jobs, traced through finished goods inventory, and eventually transferred to cost of goods sold, the year-end
balance is eliminated through an adjusting entry, offsetting the cost of goods sold. If manufacturing overhead
has a debit balance, the overhead is underapplied, and the resulting amount in cost of goods sold is
understated. The adjusting entry is:

If manufacturing overhead has a credit balance, the overhead is overapplied, and the resulting amount in cost
of goods sold is overstated. The adjusting entry is:

Returning to our example, at the end of the year, Dinosaur Vinyl had actual overhead expenses of $256,500
and applied overhead expenses of $250,000, as shown:

Since manufacturing overhead has a debit balance, it is underapplied, as it has not been completely allocated.
The adjusting journal entry is:
222  Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

If the overhead was overapplied, and the actual overhead was $248,000 and the applied overhead was
$250,000, the entry would be:

To adjust for overapplied or underapplied manufacturing overhead, some companies have a more
complicated, three-part allocation to work in process, finished goods, and cost of goods sold. This method is
typically used in the event of larger variances in their balances or in bigger companies. (You will learn more
about this in future cost or advanced managerial accounting courses.)

   YOUR TURN
   Kraken Boardsports

   Figure 4.22 (credit: modification of images provided courtesy of Kraken Boardsports, CC BY 4.0)
   Kraken Boardsports manufactures winches for snow and ski boarders to snow ski without a mountain or
   water ski without a lake (Figure 4.22). End-of-year data show these overhead expenses:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing                                                                               223

Kraken Boardsports had 6,240 direct labor hours for the year and assigns overhead to the various jobs at
the rate of $33.50 per direct labor hour.
How much overhead was overapplied or underapplied during the year? What would be the journal entry
to adjust manufacturing overhead?
Solution
The total overhead incurred is the total of:

The total overhead applied is $209,040, which is calculated as:
$33.50/direct labor hours × 6,240 direct labor hours.
The balance in manufacturing overhead is a debit balance of $210:

The adjusting journal entry is:

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Job order costing and overhead allocation are not new methods of accounting and apply to
   governmental units as well. See it applied in this 1992 report on Accounting for Shipyard Costs and
   Nuclear Waste Disposal Plans (https://openstax.org/l/50shipyard) from the United States General
   Accounting Office.

 4.7 Prepare Journal Entries for a Job Order Cost System

Although you have seen the job order costing system using both T-accounts and job cost sheets, it is
necessary to understand how these transactions are recorded in the company's general ledger.
224  Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

Journal Entries to Move Direct Materials, Direct Labor, and Overhead into Work in
Process

Dinosaur Vinyl keeps track of its inventory and orders additional inventory to have on hand when the
production department requests it. This inventory is not associated with any particular job, and the purchases
stay in raw materials inventory until assigned to a specific job. For example, Dinosaur Vinyl purchased an
additional $10,000 of vinyl and $500 of black ink to complete Macs & Cheese's billboard. If the purchase is
made on account, the entry is as shown:

As shown in Figure 4.20, for the production process for job MAC001, the job supervisor submitted a materials
requisition form for $300 in vinyl, $100 in black ink, $60 in red ink, and $60 in gold ink. For the finishing process
for Job MAC001, $120 in grommets and $60 in finishing wood were requisitioned. The entry to reflect these
actions is:

The production department employees work on the sign and send it over to the finishing/assembly
department when they have completed their portion of the job.
The direct cost of factory labor includes the direct wages paid to the employees and all other payroll costs
associated with that labor. Typically, this includes wages and the payroll taxes and fringe benefits directly tied
to those wages. The accounting system needs to keep track of the labor and the other related expenses
assigned to a particular job. These records are typically kept in a time ticket submitted by employees daily.
On April 10, the labor time sheet totaling $30 is recorded for Job MAC001 through this entry:

The assembly personnel in the finishing/assembly department complete Job MAC001 in two hours. The labor is
recorded as shown:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing  225

Indirect materials also have a materials requisition form, but the costs are recorded differently. They are first
transferred into manufacturing overhead and then allocated to work in process. The entry to record the
indirect material is to debit manufacturing overhead and credit raw materials inventory.
Indirect labor records are also maintained through time tickets, although such work is not directly traceable to
a specific job. The difference between direct labor and indirect labor is that the indirect labor records the debit
to manufacturing overhead while the credit is to factory wages payable.
Dinosaur Vinyl's time tickets indicate that $4,000 in indirect labor costs were incurred during the period. The
entry is:

Dinosaur Vinyl also records the actual overhead incurred. As shown in Figure 4.18, manufacturing overhead
costs of $21,000 were incurred. The entry to record these expenses increases the amount of overhead in the
manufacturing overhead account. The entry is:

The amount of overhead applied to Job MAC001 is $165. The process of determining the manufacturing
overhead calculation rate was explained and demonstrated in Accounting for Manufacturing Overhead. The
journal entry to record the manufacturing overhead for Job MAC001 is:

Journal Entry to Move Work in Process Costs into Finished Goods

When each job and job order cost sheet have been completed, an entry is made to transfer the total cost from
226  Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

the work in process inventory to the finished goods inventory. The total cost of the product for Job MAC001 is
$931 and the entry is:

Journal Entries to Move Finished Goods into Cost of Goods Sold

When the sale has occurred, the goods are transferred to the buyer. The product is transferred from the
finished goods inventory to cost of goods sold. A corresponding entry is also made to record the sale. The sign
for Job MAC001 had a sales price of $2,000 and a cost of $931. These are the entries to record the transfer of
goods and sale to the buyer:

The resulting accounting is shown on the company's income statement:

   THINK IT THROUGH
   Ongoing Overapplied Overhead

   At the end of each year, manufacturing overhead is analyzed, and an adjusting entry is made to dispose
   of the under- or overapplied overhead. How would you advise a company that has had overapplied
   overhead for each of the last five years?

 4.8 Explain How a Job Order Cost System Applies to a Nonmanufacturing
Environment

Job order cost systems can be used beyond the manufacturing realm and are often used in the production of

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing  227

services. The same cost tracking and journaling techniques apply, as the outcome still consists of materials,
labor, and overhead. However, the terminology changes in a nonmanufacturing environment. For example, a
movie production studio and an accounting firm produce movies and financial statement audits, respectively,
instead of manufacturing units.

Fundamentals of the Job Order Costing Method for Service Entities

Instead of being dependent on materials, service industries depend on labor. Since their work is labor
intensive, it makes sense to use labor as an activity base with billable hours often as the best allocation base.
For example, in an audit, there often will be several accountants, with differing levels of experience and
expertise involved in the assignment. The accounting firms have more billable hours at the staff level and
fewer billable hours at the partner level. And since the firm bills the partner's time at a significantly higher rate
than the staff, it makes sense to apply overhead at the billable hours instead of the billable costs.
In service industries, there is no manufacturing overhead because they are not manufacturing a product, but
instead are providing a service. Accordingly, overhead is called operating overhead.
Another terminology difference is the inventory accounts. The jobs are considered movies or assignments in
process, and are transferred to a cost of service sold account instead of to a finished goods inventory.

   CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

   Tracking Costs in Healthcare

   Healthcare is one of the industries that keeps track of materials, such as medicine. In this industry, direct
   labor is shown to the patient as the cost of the provider, such as a physician, physician assistant, or nurse
   practitioner. Indirect labor includes all other personnel from front desk staff to the nurse who gathers
   vital signs or a technician who performs tests. Patients do not see the overhead cost on their bill, but it is
   built into the invoice as part of the practitioner or testing fees.

Service Entity Use of a Job Order Costing System

To understand how a service provider uses a job order cost system, let's consider the case of IFixIT. IFixIT
Systems is a Sony-authorized repair provider that fixes audiovisual equipment brought in by customers. IFixIT
requires customers to pay $50 to diagnose the problem. IFixIt pays its employees $25 per hour and assigns
overhead equal to its direct labor cost. The customers' bills do not show overhead and are instead itemized as
parts plus labor, where the cost for parts is the original cost plus a markup, and the labor rate is $80 per hour.

A customer brought in his TV and paid the $50 diagnostic fee. IFixIT determined a new power cord was
needed. To fix it, IFixIT purchases the part from its suppliers at $42 and pays $75 in direct labor for 3 hours at
$25 per hour. Overhead is applied equal to the direct labor cost of $75. The customer is charged $310,
consisting of $70 for the part and 3 hours of labor at a rate of $80 per hour. IFixIT records the journal entries
shown:
228  Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

   ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

   Subcontractor Misrepresentation of Costs of Jobs Used to Overbill Clients

   Construction is a typical industry where job order costing and related accounting misstatements can be
   used to commit fraud. A construction subcontractor might overstate the units of production
   accomplished, the units of labor, or the equipment actually used.[2] This occurs most commonly with
   subcontractor fraud, where the subcontractor does not perform the work but bills for it anyway.
   Another complicating issue is that many subcontractors are disadvantaged business enterprises that are
   required by law to be included in governmental construction contracts. In Chicago, for example, McHugh
   Construction paid $12 million in fines to settle the claims that its disadvantaged business enterprise
   subcontractor did not perform work.[3] The subcontractor received a prison sentence, and a related party
   was put on probation. An accountant had to prepare the invoices that allowed this common type of
   scheme to operate.

2 Jim Schmid and Todd F. Taggart, "The Most Common Types of Construction Fraud," Construction Business Owner, November 2, 2011,
http://www.constructionbusinessowner.com/insurance/risk-management/most-common-types-construction-fraud.
3 Kim Slowey, "Chicago Subcontractor Sentenced to 1-year Prison Term for DBE Fraud Scheme," Construction Dive, March 20, 2017,
https://www.constructiondive.com/news/chicago-subcontractor-sentenced-to-1-year-prison-term-for-dbe-fraud-scheme/438441/.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing  229

     Key Terms

conversion costs total of labor and overhead for a product; the costs that "convert" the direct material into
     the finished product

cost driver activity that is the reason for the increase or decrease of another cost; examples include labor
     hours incurred, labor costs paid, amounts of materials used in production, units produced, machine
     hours, or any other activity that has a cause-and-effect relationship with incurred costs

cost of goods manufactured manufacturing costs incurred less the ending work in process inventory
cost of goods sold expense account that houses all costs associated with getting a product ready for sale
direct labor labor directly related to the manufacturing of the product or the production of a service
direct materials materials used in the manufacturing process that can be traced directly to the product
estimated activity base total amount of the activity for the year
expense recognition principle (also, matching principle) matches expenses with associated revenues in the

     period in which the revenues were generated
indirect labor labor not directly involved in the active conversion of materials into finished products or the

     provision of services
indirect materials materials used in production but not efficiently traceable to a specific unit of production
job cost sheet document created for each job that includes all material, labor, and overhead costs for that

     job
job order costing information system that traces the individual costs directly to the final product and not to

     production departments
loss leader product sold at a price that is often less than the cost of producing it in order to entice customers

     to buy accessories that are necessary for its use
manufacturing costs total of all costs expended in the manufacturing process; generally consists of direct

     material, direct labor, and manufacturing overhead
manufacturing overhead costs incurred in the production process that are not economically feasible to

     measure as direct material or direct labor costs; examples include indirect material, indirect labor, utilities,
     and depreciation
materials requisition form form showing which specific raw materials and costs are transferred from raw
     materials inventory to work in process inventory
operating overhead overhead account used for service industries
overapplied overhead situation when the overhead applied to the individual jobs is greater than the actual
     overhead; when overhead is overapplied, the manufacturing overhead has a credit balance
period costs typically related to a particular time period instead of attached to the production of an asset;
     treated as an expense in the period incurred (examples include many sales and administrative expenses)
prime costs direct material expenses and direct labor costs
time ticket document used to record the particular job worked on by each employee
underapplied overhead situation when the overhead applied to the individual jobs is less than the actual
     overhead; when overhead is underapplied, the manufacturing overhead has a debit balance

     Summary

4.1 Distinguish between Job Order Costing and Process Costing
  · Job order costing (JOC) is the optimal costing method for producing custom goods or when it is easy to
      identify the cost directly with the product.
230  Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

  · A JOC system assigns costs to each individual job as the costs are incurred, so that at all points in the
      manufacturing process, the costs assigned to that particular job are known.

4.2 Describe and Identify the Three Major Components of Product Costs under Job Order Costing
  · Direct materials are requested on a materials requisition form and recorded on the job cost sheet when
      transferred from raw materials inventory to the work in process inventory.
  · Time tickets are used to accumulate the labor associated with particular jobs and assigned to those jobs
      on the job cost sheet.
  · Manufacturing overhead costs are accumulated in the manufacturing overhead account and assigned to
      the individual jobs using the predetermined overhead rate.

4.3 Use the Job Order Costing Method to Trace the Flow of Product Costs through the Inventory
Accounts

  · Materials used in production include the beginning raw materials inventory and purchases, less the
      ending inventory. This amount is the amount added to the work in process inventory.

  · The cost of goods manufactured includes the beginning work in process inventory, the materials used in
      production, the direct labor assigned to each job, and the manufacturing overhead costs assigned, less
      the costs remaining in the work in process inventory. This amount is transferred to the finished goods
      inventory.

  · The cost of goods sold include the beginning finished goods inventory and the cost of goods
      manufactured during the period, less the ending inventory.

  · When the job is completed, the costs are transferred from the work in process inventory to the finished
      goods inventory.

  · When the jobs are sold, the costs are transferred from the finished goods inventory to the cost of goods
      sold.

4.4 Compute a Predetermined Overhead Rate and Apply Overhead to Production
  · Expenses are recognized when they have a direct relationship with the associated revenue, when there is
      a systematic and rational method to allocate them, or immediately when there is no expected benefit.
  · The estimated activity base is typically direct labor dollars or direct labor hours, and is based on an
      allocation base that increases or decreases as overhead increases or decreases.
  · The predetermined overhead rate is the estimated overhead divided by the activity base.

4.5 Compute the Cost of a Job Using Job Order Costing
  · Costs from the materials requisition sheet and time tickets are recorded on the job cost sheet.
  · Overhead is allocated from the manufacturing overhead account to the individual jobs and recorded on
      the job cost sheet.
  · Each job has its own job cost sheet, showing the materials, labor, and overhead for each job.

4.6 Determine and Dispose of Underapplied or Overapplied Overhead
  · Overhead is allocated to individual jobs based on the estimated overhead costs for the year and may be
      overapplied or underapplied for the year.
  · Overhead is underapplied when not all of the costs accumulated in the manufacturing overhead account
      are applied during the year.
  · Overhead is overapplied when more overhead is applied to the jobs than was actually incurred.
  · The amount of overhead overapplied or underapplied is adjusted into the cost of goods sold account.

4.7 Prepare Journal Entries for a Job Order Cost System
  · Job cost sheets record the material, labor, and overhead costs for each job, whereas journal entries

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing                                                                                      231

      actually transfer the costs into the work in process inventory, the finished goods inventory, and cost of
      goods sold.

4.8 Explain How a Job Order Cost System Applies to a Nonmanufacturing Environment
  · Job order costing can be used in nonmanufacturing companies and with the same techniques, even
      though there are not any inventory accounts.

     Multiple Choice

1. 4.1 Which of the following product situations is better suited to job order costing than to process
costing?

    A. Each product batch is exactly the same as the prior batch.
    B. The costs are easily traced to a specific product.
    C. Costs are accumulated by department.
    D. The value of work in process is based on assigning standard costs.

2. 4.1 A job order costing system is most likely used by which of the following?
    A. a pet food manufacturer
    B. a paper manufacturing company
    C. an accounting firm specializing in tax returns
    D. a stereo manufacturing company

3. 4.1 Which of the following is a prime cost?
    A. indirect materials
    B. direct labor
    C. administrative expenses
    D. factory depreciation expenses

4. 4.1 Which of the following is a conversion cost?
    A. raw materials
    B. direct materials
    C. administrative expenses
    D. factory depreciation expenses

5. 4.1 During production, to what are the costs in job order costing applied?
    A. manufacturing overhead
    B. cost of goods sold
    C. each individual product
    D. each individual department

6. 4.2 Which document lists the inventory that will be removed from the raw materials inventory?
    A. job cost sheet
    B. purchase order
    C. materials requisition form
    D. receiving document
232                                                                                            Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

7. 4.2 Which document shows the cost of direct materials, direct labor, and overhead applied for each
specific job?

    A. job cost sheet
    B. purchase order
    C. materials requisition form
    D. receiving document

8. 4.2 Which document lists the total direct materials used in a specific job?
    A. job cost sheet
    B. purchase order
    C. materials requisition form
    D. receiving document

9. 4.2 Which document lists the total direct labor used in a specific job?
    A. job cost sheet
    B. purchase order
    C. employee time ticket
    D. receiving document

10.     4.4 Assigning indirect costs to specific jobs is completed by which of the following?
    A.  applying the costs to manufacturing overhead
    B.  using the predetermined overhead rate
    C.  using the manufacturing costs incurred
    D.  applying the indirect labor to the work in process inventory

11.     4.4 In a job order cost system, which account shows the overhead used by the company?
    A.  work in process inventory
    B.  finished goods inventory
    C.  cost of goods sold
    D.  manufacturing overhead

12.     4.7 In a job order cost system, raw materials purchased are debited to which account?
    A.  raw materials inventory
    B.  work in process inventory
    C.  finished goods inventory
    D.  cost of goods sold

13.     4.7 In a job order cost system, overhead applied is debited to which account?
    A.  work in process inventory
    B.  finished goods inventory
    C.  manufacturing overhead
    D.  cost of goods sold

14.     4.7 In a job order cost system, factory wage expense is debited to which account?
    A.  raw materials inventory
    B.  work in process inventory
    C.  finished goods inventory
    D.  cost of goods sold

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing                                                                                233

15.     4.7 In a job order cost system, utility expense incurred is debited to which account?
    A.  work in process inventory
    B.  finished goods inventory
    C.  manufacturing overhead
    D.  cost of goods sold

16.     4.7 In a job order cost system, indirect labor incurred is debited to which account?
    A.  work in process inventory
    B.  finished goods inventory
    C.  manufacturing overhead
    D.  cost of goods sold

17.     4.8 The activity base for service industries is most likely to be ________.
    A.  machine hours
    B.  administrative salaries
    C.  direct labor cost
    D.  direct labor hours

     Questions

1. 4.1 A printing company manufactures notebooks of various sizes. The company manufactures 3,000
notebooks each day. Should the company use process costing or job order costing?
2. 4.1 Burnham Industries incurs these costs for the month:

What is the prime cost?
3. 4.1 Choco's Chocolates incurs these costs for the month:

What is the conversion cost?
4. 4.1 How do job order costing and process costing differ with respect to recording direct materials and
direct labor?
5. 4.1 Why are product costs assigned to the product and period costs immediately expensed?
6. 4.3 Is the cost of goods manufactured the same as the cost of goods sold?
234                                                                               Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

7. 4.3 From beginning to end, place these items in the order of the flow of goods.
    A. cost of goods sold
    B. raw materials inventory
    C. finished goods inventory
    D. work in process inventory

8. 4.4 How is the predetermined overhead rate determined?

9. 4.4 How is the predetermined overhead rate applied?

10. 4.5 Why are the overhead costs first accumulated in the manufacturing overhead account instead of in
the work in process inventory account?

11. 4.6 Why is the manufacturing overhead account debited as expenses are recognized and then credited
when overhead is applied?

12. 4.7 Match the concept on the left to its correct description.

A. job order costing      i. computes the overhead applied to each job
B. materials requisition  ii. source document indicating the number of hours an employee worked on
sheet                     specific jobs
C. overapplied overhead   iii. source document indicating the raw materials assigned to a specific
                          production job
D. predetermined          iv. the cost accounting system used by pet food manufacturers
overhead rate
E. process costing        v. the cost accounting system used by law firms
F. time ticket            vi. the result when the actual overhead is less than the amount assigned to
                          each specific job
G. underapplied overhead  vii. the result when the actual overhead is more than the amount assigned to
                          each specific job

13. 4.8 When compared to manufacturing companies, service industries do not generally use ________ as a
component of product cost.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing  235

     Exercise Set A

EA1. 4.1 Little Things manufactures toys. For each item listed, identify whether it is a product cost, a period
cost, or not an expense.

    A. internet provider services
    B. material expense
    C. raw materials inventory
    D. production equipment rental
    E. showroom rental
    F. factory employee salary
    G. Human Resource Director salary
236                                                                               Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

EA2.      4.2 Table 4.3 shows a list of expenses involved in the production of custom, professional lacrosse
sticks.
         For each item listed, state whether the cost should be applied to manufacturing or sales and
    A.   administration.
         If the cost is a manufacturing cost, state whether it is direct materials, direct labor, or manufacturing
    B.   overhead.
         If the cost is a manufacturing overhead cost, state whether it is indirect materials, indirect labor, or
    C.   another type of manufacturing overhead.

                  Expenses Involved in Lacrosse Stick Production

 Lacrosse Stick   Manufacturing or   If Manufacturing: Direct                        If Overhead: Indirect
   Production             Sales &   Materials, Direct Labor, or                   Materials, Indirect Labor,
       Costs
                   Administration              Overhead?                                     or Other?
Carbon,                    Cost?
fiberglass

Administrative
building rent

Accountant
salary

Factory building
depreciation

Strings for the
pocket

Advertising

Production
supervisor
salary

Paint for sticks

Research and
development
costs

Wages of person
who strings the
sticks

Cutting machine
depreciation

Table 4.3

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing                                                  237

                             Expenses Involved in Lacrosse Stick Production

 Lacrosse Stick              Manufacturing or   If Manufacturing: Direct        If Overhead: Indirect
   Production                        Sales &   Materials, Direct Labor, or   Materials, Indirect Labor,
       Costs
                              Administration              Overhead?                     or Other?
Human                                 Cost?
resources
salaries

Factory
maintenance

Table 4.3
EA3. 4.2 Burnham Industries incurs these costs for the month:

    A. What is the prime cost?
    B. What is the conversion cost?
EA4. 4.3 Marzoni's records show raw materials inventory had a beginning balance of $200 and an ending
balance of $300. If the cost of materials used during the month was $900, what were the purchases made
during the month?
EA5. 4.3 Sterling's records show the work in process inventory had a beginning balance of $4,000 and an
ending balance of $3,000. How much direct labor was incurred if the records also show:

EA6. 4.3 Logo Gear purchased $2,250 worth of merchandise during the month, and its monthly income
statement shows cost of goods sold of $2,000. What was the beginning inventory if the ending inventory was
$1,000?
EA7. 4.4 A company estimates its manufacturing overhead will be $750,000 for the next year. What is the
predetermined overhead rate given the following independent allocation bases?

    A. Budgeted direct labor hours: 60,000
    B. Budgeted direct labor expense: $1,500,000
    C. Estimated machine hours: 100,000
238                                                                               Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

EA8. 4.4 Job order cost sheets show the following costs assigned to each job:

The company assigns overhead at $1.25 for each direct labor dollar spent. What is the total cost for each of the
jobs?

EA9. 4.4 A new company started production. Job 10 was completed, and Job 20 remains in production. Here
is the information from job cost sheets from their first and only jobs so far:

Using the information provided,

    A. What is the balance in work in process?
    B. What is the balance in the finished goods inventory?
    C. If manufacturing overhead is applied on the basis of direct labor hours, what is the predetermined

          overhead rate?

EA10. 4.5 K company production was working on Job 1 and Job 2 during the month. Of the $780 in direct
materials, $375 in materials was requested for Job 1. Direct labor cost, including payroll taxes, are $23 per
hour, and employees worked 18 hours on Job 1 and 29 hours on Job 2. Overhead is applied at the rate of $20
per direct labor hours. Prepare job order cost sheets for each job.

EA11.      4.7 A company has the following transactions during the week.
      ·  Purchase of $1,000 raw materials inventory
      ·  Assignment of $500 of raw materials inventory to Job 5
      ·  Payroll for 20 hours with $1,000 assigned to Job 5
      ·  Factory utility bills of $750
      ·  Overhead applied at the rate of $10 per hour

What is the cost assigned to Job 5 at the end of the week?

EA12. 4.7 During the month, Job AB2 used specialized machinery for 450 hours and incurred $500 in utilities
on account, $300 in factory depreciation expense, and $100 in property tax on the factory. Prepare journal
entries for the following:

    A. Record the expenses incurred.
    B. Record the allocation of overhead at the predetermined rate of $1.50 per machine hour.

EA13. 4.7 Job 113 was completed at a cost of $5,000, and Job 85 was completed at a cost of $3,000 and sold
on account for $4,500. Prepare journal entries for the following:

    A. Completion of Job 113.
    B. Completion and sale of Job 85.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing                                                                                 239

EA14. 4.7 A company's individual job sheets show these costs:

Overhead is applied at 1.25 times the direct labor cost. Use the data on the cost sheets to perform these tasks:

    A. Apply overhead to each of the jobs.
    B. Prepare an entry to record the assignment of direct materials to work in process.
    C. Prepare an entry to record the assignment of direct labor to work in process.
    D. Prepare an entry to record the assignment of manufacturing overhead to work in process.

EA15. 4.7 A summary of material requisition slips and time tickets, along with the overhead allocation, show
these costs:

    A. Prepare an entry to record the assignment of direct material to work in process.
    B. Prepare an entry to record the assignment of direct labor to work in process.
    C. Prepare an entry to record the assignment of manufacturing overhead to work in process.

  B Exercise Set B

EB1. 4.1 Abuah Goods manufactures clothing. For each item listed, identify whether it is a product cost, a
period cost, or not an expense.

    A. pins to keep materials together while garment is being manufactured
    B. real estate taxes on store
    C. advertising expense
    D. product inspector wages
    E. shirts for sale
    F. Chief Financial Officer salary
    G. cost of goods sold
EB2. 4.2 Choco's Chocolates incurs the following costs for the month:

    A. What is the prime cost?
    B. What is the conversion cost?
240                                                                               Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

EB3.     4.2 The table shows a list of expenses involved in the production of custom snowboard bindings.
    A.  For each item listed, state if the cost is manufacturing or sales and administration.
    B.  If the cost is a manufacturing cost, state if it is direct materials, direct labor, or manufacturing
        overhead.
    C.  If the cost is a manufacturing overhead cost, state if it is indirect materials, indirect labor, or another
        type of manufacturing overhead.

                    Snowboard Binding Production Costs

     Snowboard      Manufacturing or   If Manufacturing: Direct                   If Overhead: Indirect
       Bindings             Sales &   Materials, Direct Labor, or                  Materials, Indirect
                                                                                     Labor, or Other?
 Production Costs    Administration              Overhead?
                             Cost?
Aluminum

Factory building
rent

Fiberglass
framework for each
pair of bindings

Accountant salary

Administration
building
depreciation

Straps

Advertising

Production
supervisor salary

Glue

Research and
development costs

Inspector wages

Metal shaping
machine
depreciation

Human resources
salaries

Table 4.4

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing                                                                        241

                             Snowboard Binding Production Costs

     Snowboard               Manufacturing or   If Manufacturing: Direct    If Overhead: Indirect
       Bindings                      Sales &   Materials, Direct Labor, or   Materials, Indirect
                                                                               Labor, or Other?
 Production Costs             Administration              Overhead?
                                      Cost?
Factory repair

Table 4.4

EB4. 4.3 Masonry's records show the raw materials inventory had purchases of $1,000 and an ending raw
materials inventory balance of $200. If the cost of materials used during the month was $900, what was the
beginning inventory?

EB5. 4.3 Steinway's records show their work in process inventory had a beginning balance of $3,000 and an
ending balance of $3,500. How much overhead was applied if the records also show the following:

EB6. 4.3 Langston's purchased $3,100 of merchandise during the month, and its monthly income statement
shows a cost of goods sold of $3,000. What was the beginning inventory if the ending inventory was $1,250?

EB7. 4.4 A company estimates its manufacturing overhead will be $840,000 for the next year. What is the
predetermined overhead rate given each of the following independent allocation bases?

    A. Budgeted direct labor hours: 90,615
    B. Budgeted direct labor expense: $750,000
    C. Estimated machine hours: 150,000

EB8. 4.4 Job order cost sheets show the following costs assigned to each job:

The company assigns overhead at twice the direct labor cost. What is the total cost for each job?
242                                                                               Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

EB9. 4.4 A new company started production. Job 1 was completed, and Job 2 remains in production. Here is
the information from the job cost sheets from their first and only jobs so far:

Using the information provided,

    A. What is the balance in work in process?
    B. What is the balance in finished goods inventory?
    C. If manufacturing overhead is applied on the basis of direct labor hours, what is the predetermined

          overhead rate?

EB10. 4.5 Inez has the following information relating to Job AA5. Direct material cost was $200,000, direct
labor was $36,550, and overhead applied on the basis of direct labor hours was $73,100. What was the
predetermined overhead rate using the labor rate of $17 per hour?

EB11. 4.6 A company has the following information relating to its production costs:

Compute the actual and applied overhead using the company's predetermined overhead rate of $23.92 per
machine hour. Was the overhead overapplied or underapplied, and by how much?

EB12.      4.7 A company has the following transactions during the week.
      ·  Purchase of $3,000 raw materials inventory
      ·  Assignment of $700 of raw materials inventory to Job 7
      ·  Payroll for 10 hours and $3,000 is assigned to Job 7
      ·  Factory depreciation of $1,750
      ·  Overhead applied at the rate of $200 per hour

What is the cost assigned to Job 7 at the end of the week?

EB13. 4.7 During the month, Job Arch2 used specialized machinery for 350 hours and incurred $700 in
utilities on account, $400 in factory depreciation expense, and $200 in property tax on the factory. Prepare
journal entries for the following:

    A. Record the expenses incurred.
    B. Record the allocation of overhead at the predetermined rate of $1.50 per machine hour.

EB14. 4.7 Job 113 was completed at a cost of $7,500, and Job 85 was completed at a cost of $2,300 and sold
on account for $4,500. Prepare journal entries for the following:

    A. Completion of Job 113.
    B. Completion and sale of Job 85.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing                                                                 243

EB15. 4.7 A company's individual job sheets show these costs:

Overhead is applied at 1.75 times the direct labor cost. Use the data on the cost sheets to perform these tasks:

    A. Apply overhead to each of the jobs.
    B. Prepare an entry to record the assignment of direct material to work in process.
    C. Prepare an entry to record the assignment of direct labor to work in process.
    D. Prepare an entry to record the assignment of manufacturing overhead to work in process.

EB16. 4.7 A summary of materials requisition slips and time tickets, along with the overhead allocation,
show these costs:

A. Prepare an entry to record the assignment of direct material to work in process.
B. Prepare an entry to record the assignment of direct labor to work in process.
C. Prepare an entry to record the assignment of manufacturing overhead to work in process.

        Problem Set A

PA1.     4.1 For each item listed, state whether a job order costing system or process costing system would be
best.
        cereal
    A.  team uniforms
    B.  houses
    C.  beach chairs
    D.  plastic
    E.  restaurant-specific pizza boxes
    F.  sneakers customized with number and colors
    G.

PA2. 4.4 York Company is a machine shop that estimated overhead will be $50,000, consisting of 5,000
hours of direct labor. The cost to make Job 0325 is $70 in aluminum and two hours of labor at $20 per hour.
During the month, York incurs $50 in indirect material cost, $150 in administrative labor, $300 in utilities, and
$250 in depreciation expense.

    A. What is the predetermined overhead rate if direct labor hours are considered the cost driver?
    B. What is the cost of Job 0325?
    C. What is the overhead incurred during the month?
244  Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

PA3. 4.4 Pocono Cement Forms expects $900,000 in overhead during the next year. It does not know
whether it should apply overhead on the basis of its anticipated direct labor hours of 60,000 or its expected
machine hours of 30,000. Determine the product cost under each predetermined allocation rate if the last job
incurred $1,550 in direct material cost, 90 direct labor hours, and 75 machine hours. Wages are paid at $16 per
hour.

PA4. 4.5 Job cost sheets show the following information:

What are the balances in the work in process inventory, finished goods inventory, and cost of goods sold for
January, February, and March?

PA5. 4.5 Complete the information in the cost computations shown here:

PA6. 4.5 During the year, a company purchased raw materials of $77,321, and incurred direct labor costs of
$125,900. Overhead is applied at the rate of 75% of the direct labor cost. These are the inventory balances:

Compute the cost of materials used in production, the cost of goods manufactured, and the cost of goods
sold.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing                                     245

PA7. 4.5 Freeman Furnishings has summarized its data as shown:

Compute the cost of goods manufactured, assuming that the overhead is allocated based on direct labor
hours.
PA8. 4.6 Coop's Stoops estimated its annual overhead to be $85,000 and based its predetermined overhead
rate on 24,286 direct labor hours. At the end of the year, actual overhead was $90,000 and the total direct labor
hours were 24,100. What is the entry to dispose of the overapplied or underapplied overhead?
PA9. 4.6 Mountain Peaks applies overhead on the basis of machine hours and reports the following
information:

    A. What is the predetermined overhead rate?
    B. How much overhead was applied during the year?
    C. Was overhead over- or underapplied, and by what amount?
    D. What is the journal entry to dispose of the over- or underapplied overhead?
PA10. 4.6 The actual overhead for a company is $74,539. Overhead was based on 6,000 direct labor hours
and was $2,539 underapplied for the year.
    A. What is the overhead application rate per direct labor hour?
    B. What is the journal entry to dispose of the underapplied overhead?
PA11. 4.6 When setting its predetermined overhead application rate, Tasty Box Meals estimated its
overhead would be $100,000 and would require 25,000 machine hours in the next year. At the end of the year,
it found that actual overhead was $102,000 and required 26,000 machine hours.
    A. Determine the predetermined overhead rate.
    B. What is the overhead applied during the year?
    C. Prepare the journal entry to eliminate the underapplied or overapplied overhead.
246                                                                               Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

PA12. 4.7 The following data summarize the operations during the year. Prepare a journal entry for each
transaction.

    A. Purchase of raw materials on account: $3,000
    B. Raw materials used by Job 1: $500
    C. Raw materials used as indirect materials: $100
    D. Direct labor for Job 1: $300
    E. Indirect labor incurred: $50
    F. Factory utilities incurred on account: $700
    G. Adjusting entry for factory depreciation: $250
    H. Manufacturing overhead applied as percent of direct labor: 200%
    I. Job 1 is transferred to finished goods
    J. Job 1 is sold: $3,000
    K. Manufacturing overhead is overapplied: $100

PA13. 4.7 The following events occurred during March for Ajax Company. Prepare a journal entry for each
transaction.

    A. Materials were purchased on account for $35,429.
    B. Materials were requisitioned to begin work on Job C15 in the amount of $25,259.
    C. Direct labor expense for Job C15 was $24,129.
    D. Actual overhead was incurred on account of $32,852.
    E. Factory overhead was charged to Job C15 at the rate of 200% of direct labor.
    F. Job C15 was transferred to finished goods at $97,646.
    G. Job C15 was sold on account for $401,000.

PA14.     4.8 A movie production studio incurred the following costs related to its current movie:
    A.  Purchased office supplies on account: $33,000
    B.  Issued direct supplies: $22,512
    C.  Issued indirect supplies: $7,535
    D.  Time tickets showing direct labor: $32,503,230
    E.  Time tickets showing indirect labor: $574,326
    F.  Utilities expense on account: $957,323
    G.  Overhead applied: 10% of direct labor cost

Create journal entries for the listed transactions.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing                                                                                   247

B Problem Set B

PB1.     4.1 For each item listed, state whether a job order costing system or process costing system would be
best.
        television repair
    A.  cell phone charge cords
    B.  glassware with company logo
    C.  dog food
    D.  golf balls
    E.  hotel signs to welcome guests
    F.  highlighters and pens
    G.

PB2. 4.4 Rulers Company is a neon sign company that estimated overhead will be $60,000, consisting of
1,500 machine hours. The cost to make Job 416 is $95 in neon, 15 hours of labor at $13 per hour, and five
machine hours. During the month, it incurs $95 in indirect material cost, $130 in administrative labor, $320 in
utilities, and $350 in depreciation expense.

    A. What is the predetermined overhead rate if machine hours are considered the cost driver?
    B. What is the cost of Job 416?
    C. What is the overhead incurred during the month?

PB3. 4.4 Event Forms expects $120,000 in overhead during the next year. It doesn't know whether it should
apply overhead on the basis of its anticipated direct labor hours of 6,000 or its expected machine hours of
5,000. What would be the product cost under each predetermined allocation rate if the last job incurred $3,500
in direct material cost, 55 direct labor hours, and 55 machine hours? Wages are paid at $17 per hour.

PB4. 4.5 Summary information from a company's job cost sheets shows the following information:

What are the balances in the work in process inventory, finished goods inventory, and cost of goods sold for
April, May, and June?
248                                                                     Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

PB5. 4.5 Complete the information in the cost computations shown here:

PB6. 4.5 During the year, a company purchased raw materials of $77,321 and incurred direct labor costs of
$125,900. Overhead is applied at the rate of 75% of the direct labor cost. These are the inventory balances:

Compute the cost of materials used in production, the cost of goods manufactured, and the cost of goods
sold.
PB7. 4.5 Freeman Furnishings has summarized its data as shown. Direct labor hours will be used as the
activity base to allocate overhead:

Compute the cost of goods manufactured.
PB8. 4.6 Queen Bee's Honey, Inc., estimated its annual overhead to be $110,000 and based its
predetermined overhead rate on 27,500 direct labor hours. At the end of the year, actual overhead was
$106,000 and the total direct labor hours were 29,000. What is the entry to dispose of the overapplied or
underapplied overhead?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 4 Job Order Costing                                                                           249

PB9. 4.6 Mountain Tops applies overhead on the basis of direct labor hours and reports the following
information:

    A. What is the predetermined overhead rate?
    B. How much overhead was applied during the year?
    C. Was overhead overapplied or underapplied, and by what amount?
    D. What is the journal entry to dispose of the overapplied or underapplied overhead?

PB10. 4.6 The actual overhead for a company is $73,175. Overhead was based on 4,500 machine hours and
was $3,325 overapplied for the year.

    A. What is the overhead application rate per direct labor hour?
    B. What is the journal entry to dispose of the underapplied overhead?

PB11. 4.6 When setting its predetermined overhead application rate, Tasty Turtle estimated its overhead
would be $75,000 and manufacturing would require 25,000 machine hours in the next year. At the end of the
year, it found that actual overhead was $74,000 and manufacturing required 24,000 machine hours.

    A. Determine the predetermined overhead rate.
    B. What is the overhead applied during the year?
    C. Prepare the journal entry to eliminate the under- or overapplied overhead.

PB12. 4.7 The following data summarize the operations during the year. Prepare a journal entry for each
transaction.

    A. Purchase of raw materials on account: $1,500
    B. Raw materials used by Job 1: $400
    C. Raw materials used as indirect materials: $50
    D. Direct labor for Job 1: $200
    E. Indirect labor incurred for Job 1: $30
    F. Factory utilities incurred on account: $500
    G. Adjusting entry for factory depreciation: $200
    H. Manufacturing overhead applied as percent of direct labor: 100%
    I. Job 1 is transferred to finished goods
    J. Job 1 is sold: $1,000
    K. Manufacturing overhead is underapplied: $100

PB13. 4.7 The following events occurred during March for Ajax Company. Prepare a journal entry for each
transaction.

    A. Materials were purchased on account for $5,429.
    B. Materials were requisitioned to begin work on Job C15 in the amount of $2,500.
    C. Direct labor expense for Job C15 was $4,250.
    D. Actual overhead was incurred on account for $5,385.
    E. Factory overhead was charged to Job C15 at the rate of 200% direct labor.
    F. Job C15 was transferred to finished goods at $15,250.
    G. Job C15 was sold on account for $28,000.
250                                                                               Chapter 4 Job Order Costing

PB14.     4.8 A leather repair shop incurred the following expenses while repairing luggage for a major airline.
    A.  Time cards showing direct labor: $750
    B.  Time cards showing indirect labor: $100
    C.  Purchased repair supplies on account: $1,500
    D.  Issued indirect supplies: $350
    E.  Utilities expense on account: $24,000
    F.  Overhead applied: 100% of direct labor costs

Journalize the listed transactions.

     Thought Provokers

TP1. 4.1 Can a company use both job order costing and process costing? Why or why not?

TP2. 4.4 If a job order cost system tracks the direct materials and direct labor, why doesn't it track the
actual overhead used for a specific job?

TP3. 4.5 What are the similarities in calculating the cost of materials used in production, the cost of goods
manufactured, and the cost of goods sold?

TP4. 4.6 If a company bases its predetermined overhead rate on 100,000 machine hours, and it actually has
100,000 machine hours, would there be an underapplied or overapplied overhead?

TP5. 4.7 How do the job cost sheets act as a subsidiary ledger for the work in process inventory if journal
entries are not made to the job cost sheets?

TP6. 4.8 How is a job order cost system used in a service industry?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
     5

              Process Costing

Figure 5.1 David and William's Family Cookie Venture. (credit: modification of "Big Giant cookies" by Sayuri
Miss/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

 Chapter Outline

  5.1 Compare and Contrast Job Order Costing and Process Costing
  5.2 Explain and Identify Conversion Costs
  5.3 Explain and Compute Equivalent Units and Total Cost of Production in an Initial Processing Stage
  5.4 Explain and Compute Equivalent Units and Total Cost of Production in a Subsequent Processing Stage
  5.5 Prepare Journal Entries for a Process Costing System

      Why It Matters

   David and William's family has used a secret family recipe for generations to make amazing chocolate chip
   cookies. While in college, they helped their grandmother, who used only locally sourced products, make and
   sell the cookies to a local restaurant. They helped her become more efficient, discovered how to retain the
   quality taste while making larger batches, and developed a plate-sized version that could be decorated similar
   to a birthday cake. After creating an equally successful peanut butter cookie recipe, David and William decided
   to expand the business and sell to high-end grocers as well as to a second restaurant. They found it was
   optimal in terms of cost, efficiency, and quality to produce 100 cookies per batch for each regular-sized cookie
   and 5 cookies per batch for the large cookies. They surveyed restaurants and grocery stores and determined
   that each flavor should be offered in four different package sizes. They also analyzed the marketability at
   various sale prices. David and William now know they need to use their information to identify the costs
   associated with making the cookies. They need to know the cost to produce one unit of their product in order
   to price their cookies correctly, determine the optimal product mix, manage efficiency and process
   improvement, and make other management decisions.
252  Chapter 5 Process Costing

 5.1 Compare and Contrast Job Order Costing and Process Costing

As you've learned, job order costing is the optimal accounting method when costs and production
specifications are not identical for each product or customer but the direct material and direct labor costs can
easily be traced to the final product. Job order costing is often a more complex system and is appropriate
when the level of detail is necessary, as discussed in Job Order Costing. Examples of products manufactured
using the job order costing method include tax returns or audits conducted by a public accounting firm,
custom furniture, or, in a comprehensive example, semitrucks. At the Peterbilt factory in Denton, Texas, the
company can build over 100,000 unique versions of their semitrucks without making the same truck twice.

Process costing is the optimal costing system when a standardized process is used to manufacture identical
products and the direct material, direct labor, and manufacturing overhead cannot be easily or economically
traced to a specific unit. Process costing is used most often when manufacturing a product in batches. Each
department or production process or batch process tracks its direct material and direct labor costs as well as
the number of units in production. The actual cost to produce each unit through a process costing system
varies, but the average result is an adequate determination of the cost for each manufactured unit. Examples
of items produced and accounted for using a form of the process costing method could be soft drinks,
petroleum products, or even furniture such as chairs, assuming that the company makes batches of the same
chair, instead of customizing final products for individual customers.

For example, small companies, such as David and William's, and large companies, such as Nabisco, use similar
cost-determination processes. In order to understand how much each product costs--for example, Oreo
cookies--Nabisco uses process costing to track the direct materials, direct labor, and manufacturing overhead
used in the manufacturing of its products. Oreo production has six distinct steps or departments: (1) make the
cookie dough, (2) press the cookie dough into a molding machine, (3) bake the cookies, (4) make the filling and
apply it to the cookies, (5) put the cookies together into a sandwich, and (6) and place the cookies into plastic
trays and packages. Each department keeps track of its direct materials used and direct labor incurred, and
manufacturing overhead applied to facilitate determining the cost of a batch of Oreo cookies.

As previously mentioned, process costing is used when similar items are produced in large quantities. As such,
many individuals immediately associate process costing with assembly line production. Process costing works
best when products cannot be distinguished from each other and, in addition to obvious production line
products like ice cream or paint, also works for more complex manufacturing of similar products like small
engines. Conversely, products in a job order cost system are manufactured in small quantities and include
custom jobs such as custom manufacturing products. They can also be legal or accounting tasks, movie
production, or major projects such as construction activities.

The difference between process costing and job order costing relates to how the costs are assigned to the
products. In either costing system, the ability to obtain and analyze cost data is needed. This results in the
costing system selected being the one that best matches the manufacturing process.

A job order cost system is often more expensive to maintain than a basic process costing system, since there is
a cost associated with assigning the individual material and labor to the product. Thus, a job order cost system
is used for custom jobs when it is easy to determine the cost of materials and labor used for each job. A
process cost system is often less expensive to maintain and works best when items are identical and it is
difficult to trace the exact cost of materials and labor to the final product. For example, assume that your
company uses three production processes to make jigsaw puzzles. The first process glues the picture on the
cardboard backing, the second process cuts the puzzle into pieces, and the final process loads the pieces into

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 5 Process Costing  253

the boxes and seals them. Tracing the complete costs for the batch of similar puzzles would likely entail three
steps, with three separate costing system components. In this environment, it would be difficult and not
economically feasible to trace the exact materials and the exact labor to each individual puzzle; rather, it would
be more efficient to trace the costs per batch of puzzles.

The costing system used typically depends on whether the company can most efficiently and economically
trace the costs to the job (favoring job order costing system) or to the production department or batch
(favoring a process costing system).

While the costing systems are different from each other, management uses the information provided to make
similar managerial decisions, such as setting the sales price. For example, in a job order cost system, each job
is unique, which allows management to establish individual prices for individual projects. Management also
needs to establish a sales price for a product produced with a process costing system, but this system is not
designed to stop the production process and individually cost each batch of a product, so management must
set a price that will work for many batches of the product.

In addition to setting the sales price, managers need to know the cost of their products in order to determine
the value of inventory, plan production, determine labor needs, and make long- and short-term plans. They
also need to know the costs to determine when a new product should be added or an old product removed
from production.

In this chapter, you will learn when and why process costing is used. You'll also learn the concepts of
conversion costs and equivalent units of production and how to use these for calculating the unit and total
cost of items produced using a process costing system.

Basic Managerial Accounting Terms Used in Job Order Costing and Process Costing

Regardless of the costing system used, manufacturing costs consist of direct material, direct labor, and
manufacturing overhead. Figure 5.2 shows a partial organizational chart for Rock City Percussion, a drumstick
manufacturer. In this example, two groups--administrative and manufacturing--report directly to the chief
financial officer (CFO). Each group has a vice president responsible for several departments. The
organizational chart also shows the departments that report to the production department, illustrating the
production arrangement. The material storage unit stores the types of wood used (hickory, maple, and birch),
the tips (nylon and felt), and packaging materials.
254  Chapter 5 Process Costing

Figure 5.2 The Organizational Chart for Rock City Percussion. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Understanding the company's organization is an important first step in any costing system. Next is
understanding the production process. The most basic drumstick is made of hickory and has a wooden tip.
When the popular size 5A stick is manufactured, the hickory stored in the materials storeroom is delivered to
the shaping department where the wood is cut into pieces, shaped into dowels, and shaped into the size 5A
shape while under a stream of water. The sticks are dried, and then sent to the packaging department, where
the sticks are embossed with the Rock City Percussion logo, inspected, paired, packaged, and shipped to retail
outlets such as Guitar Center. The manufacturing process is described in Figure 5.3.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 5 Process Costing  255

Figure 5.3 Rock City Percussion Manufacturing Process. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

The different units within Rock City Percussion illustrate the two main cost categories of a manufacturing
company: manufacturing costs and administrative costs.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Understanding the full manufacturing process for a product helps with tracking costs. This video on how
   drumsticks are made (https://openstax.org/l/50drumsticks) shows the production process for
   drumsticks at one company, starting with the raw wood and ending with packaging.

Manufacturing Costs

Manufacturing costs or product costs include all expenses required to manufacture the product: direct
materials, direct labor, and manufacturing overhead. Since process costing assigns the costs to each
department, the inventory at the end of the period includes the finished goods inventory, and the work in
process inventory for each manufacturing department. For example, using the departments shown in
Figure 5.3, raw materials inventory is the cost paid for the materials that remain in the storeroom until
requested.
While still in production, the work in process units are moved from one department to the next until they are
completed, so the work in process inventory includes all of the units in the shaping and packaging
departments. When the units are completed, they are transferred to finished goods inventory and become
costs of goods sold when the product is sold.
When assigning costs to departments, it is important to separate the product costs from the period costs,
which are those that are typically related with a particular time period, instead of attached to the production of
an asset. Management often needs additional information to make decisions and needs the product costs
further categorized as prime costs or conversion costs (Figure 5.4). Prime costs are costs that include the
primary (or direct) product costs: direct material and direct labor. Conversion costs are the costs necessary to
256  Chapter 5 Process Costing

convert direct materials into a finished product: direct labor and manufacturing overhead, which includes
other costs that are not classified as direct materials or direct labor, such as plant insurance, utilities, or
property taxes. Also, note that direct labor is considered to be a component of both prime costs and
conversion costs.

Figure 5.4 Prime Costs and Conversion Costs. Product costs can be categorized as prime costs (direct
product costs) or conversion costs (costs incurred while converting the materials into a finished product).
Direct labor is accounted for in both categories. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Job order costing tracks prime costs to assign direct material and direct labor to individual products (jobs).
Process costing also tracks prime costs to assign direct material and direct labor to each production
department (batch). Manufacturing overhead is another cost of production, and it is applied to products (job
order) or departments (process) based on an appropriate activity base.

   ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

   The Unethical Bakery Accountant[1],[2]

   According to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), "Sandy Jenkins was a shy, daydreaming
   accountant at the Collin Street Bakery, the world's most famous fruitcake company. He was tired of
   feeling invisible, so he started stealing--and got a little carried away." Being unethical netted the
   accountant ten years in federal prison, and his wife Kay was sentenced to five years' probation and 100
   hours of community service, and she was required to write a formal apology to the bakery. According to
   the FBI, "Jenkins spent over $11 million on a Black American Express card alone--roughly $98,000 per
   month over the course of the scheme--for a couple that had a legitimate income, through the Bakery, of
   approximately $50,000 per year."
   How did this happen? Texas Monthly reports that Sandy found a way to write unapproved checks in the
   accounting system. He implemented his accounting system and created checks that were "signed" by
   the owner of the company, Bob McNutt. McNutt was perplexed as to why his bakery was not more

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 5 Process Costing  257

   profitable year after year. The accountant was stealing the money while making the stolen checks appear
   to be paying for material costs or operating costs. According to Texas Monthly, "Once Sandy was sure that
   nobody had noticed the first fraudulent check, he tried it again. And again and again. Each time, Sandy
   would repeat the scheme, pairing his fraudulent check with one that appeared legitimate. Someone
   would have to closely examine the checks to see any discrepancies, and that seemed unlikely." The
   multimillion dollar fraud was exposed when another accountant looked closely at the checks and noticed
   discrepancies.

Selling and Administrative Expenses

Selling and administrative (S&A) expenses are period costs, which means that they are recorded in the
period in which they were incurred. Selling and administrative expenses typically are not directly assigned to
the items produced or services provided and include costs of departments not directly associated with
manufacturing but necessary to operate the business. The selling costs component of S&A expenses is related
to the promotion and sale of the company's products, while administrative expenses are related to the
administration of the company. Some examples of S&A expenses include marketing costs; administration
building rent; the chief executive officer's salary expense; and the accounting, payroll, and data processing
department expenses.
These general rules for S&A expenses, however, have their exceptions. For example, some items that are
classified as overhead, such as plant insurance, are period costs but are classified as overhead and are
attached to the items produced as product costs.
The expense recognition principle is the primary reason to separate the costs of production from the other
expenses of the company. This principle requires costs to be recorded in the period in which they are incurred.
The costs are expensed when matched to the revenue with which they are associated; this is commonly
referred to as having the expenses follow the revenues.
Period costs are expensed during the period in which they are incurred; this allows a company to apply the
administrative and other expenses shown on the income statement to the same period in which the company
earns income. Under generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), separating the production costs and
assigning them to the department results in the costs of the product staying with the work in process
inventory for each department. This follows the expense recognition principle because the cost of the product
is expensed when revenue from the sale is recognized.

Equivalent Units

In a process cost system, costs are maintained by each department, and the method for determining the cost
per individual unit is different than in a job order costing system. Rock City Percussion uses a process cost
system because the drumsticks are produced in batches, and it is not economically feasible to trace the direct
labor or direct material, like hickory, to a specific drumstick. Therefore, the costs are maintained by each

1 Katy Vine. "Just Desserts." Texas Monthly. October 2010. https://features.texasmonthly.com/editorial/just-desserts/
2 Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). "Former Collin Street Bakery Executive and Wife Sentenced." September 16, 2015. https://www.fbi.gov/contact-us/field-offices/
dallas/news/press-releases/former-collin-street-bakery-executive-and-wife-sentenced
258                                                                               Chapter 5 Process Costing

department, rather than by job, as they are in job order costing.

How does an organization determine the cost of each unit in a process costing environment? The costs in each
department are allocated to the number of units produced in a given period. This requires determination of
the number of units produced, but this is not always an easy process. At the end of the accounting period,
there typically are always units still in production, and these units are only partially complete. Think of it this
way: At midnight on the last day of the month, all accounting numbers need to be determined in order to
process the financial statements for that month, but the production process does not stop at the end of each
accounting period. However, the number of units produced must be calculated at the end of the accounting
period to determine the number of equivalent units, or the number of units that would have been produced
if the units were produced sequentially and in their entirety in a particular time period. The number of
equivalent units is different from the number of actual units and represents the number of full or whole units
that could have been produced given the amount of effort applied. To illustrate, consider this analogy. You
have five large pizzas that each contained eight slices. Your friends served themselves, and when they were
finished eating, there were several partial pizzas left. In equivalent units, determine how many whole pizzas
are left if the remaining slices are divided as shown in Figure 5.5.

  · Pie 1 had one slice
  · Pie 2 had two slices
  · Pie 3 had two slices
  · Pie 4 had three slices
  · Pie 5 had eight slices

Together, there are sixteen slices left. Since there are eight slices per pizza, the leftover pizza would be
considered two full equivalent units of pizzas. The equivalent unit is determined separately for direct materials
and for conversion costs as part of the computation of the per-unit cost for both material and conversion
costs.

Figure 5.5  Equivalent Units. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
license)

Major Characteristics of Process Costing

Process costing is the optimal system for a company to use when the production process results in many
similar units. It is used when production is continuous or occurs in large batches and it is difficult to trace a

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 5 Process Costing  259

particular input cost to a specific individual product.

For example, before David and William found ways to make five large cookies per batch, their family always
made one large cookie per batch. In order to make five cookies at a time, they had to gather the ingredients
and baking materials, including five bowls and five cookie sheets. The exact amount of ingredients for one
large cookie was mixed in each separate bowl and then placed on the cookie sheet. When this method was
used, it was easy to establish that exactly one egg, two cups of flour, three-quarter cup of chocolate chips,
three-quarter cup of sugar, one-quarter teaspoon salt, and so forth, were in each cookie. This made it easy to
determine the exact cost of each cookie. But if David and William used one bowl instead of five bowls,
measured the ingredients into it and then divided the dough into five large cookies, they could not know for
certain that each cookie has exactly two cups of flour. One cookie may have 1 7/8 cups and another may have
1 15/16 cups, and one cookie may have a few more chocolate chips than another. It is also impossible to trace
the chocolate chips from each bag to each cookie because the chips were mixed together. These variations do
not affect the taste and are not important in this type of accounting. Process costing is optimal when the
products are relatively homogenous or indistinguishable from one another, such as bottles of vegetable oil or
boxes of cereal.

Often, process costing makes sense if the individual costs or values of each unit are not significant. For
example, it would not be cost effective for a restaurant to make each cup of iced tea separately or to track the
direct material and direct labor used to make each eight-ounce glass of iced tea served to a customer. In this
scenario, job order costing is a less efficient accounting method because it costs more to track the costs per
eight ounces of iced tea than the cost of a batch of tea. Overall, when it is difficult or not economically feasible
to track the costs of a product individually, process costing is typically the best cost system to use.

Process costing can also accommodate increasingly complex business scenarios. While making drumsticks
may sound simple, an immense amount of technology is involved. Rock City Percussion makes 8,000 hickory
sticks per day, four days each week. The sticks made of maple and birch are manufactured on the fifth day of
the week. It is difficult to tell the first drumstick made on Monday from the 32,000th one made on Thursday, so
a computer matches the sticks in pairs based on the tone produced.

Process costing measures and assigns the costs to the associated department. The basic 5A hickory stick
consists only of hickory as direct material. The rest of the manufacturing process involves direct labor and
manufacturing overhead, so the focus is on properly assigning those costs. Thus, process costing works well
for simple production processes such as cereal, rubber, and steel, and for more complicated production
processes such as the manufacturing of electronics and watches, if there is a degree of similarity in the
production process.

In a process cost system, each department accumulates its costs to compute the value of work in process
inventory, so there will be a work in process inventory for each manufacturing or production department as
well as an inventory cost for finished goods inventory. Manufacturing departments are often organized by the
various stages of the production process. For example, blending, baking, and packaging could each be
categorized as manufacturing or production departments for the cookie producer, while cutting, assembly,
and finishing could be manufacturing or production departments with accompanying costs for a furniture
manufacturer. Each department, or process, will have its own work in process inventory account, but there will
only be one finished goods inventory account.

There are two methods used to compute the values in the work in process and finished goods inventories. The
first method is the weighted-average method, which includes all costs (costs incurred during the current
period and costs incurred during the prior period and carried over to the current period). This method is often
favored, because in the process cost production method there often is little product left at the end of the
260                                                                               Chapter 5 Process Costing

period and most has been transferred out. The second method is the first-in, first-out (FIFO) method, which
calculates the unit costs based on the assumption that the first units sold come from the prior period's work in
process that was carried over into the current period and completed. After these units are sold, the newer
completed units can then be sold. The theory is similar to the FIFO inventory valuation process that you
learned about in Inventory (http://cnx.org/content/m67888/latest/) . (Since the FIFO process costing method
is more complicated than the weighted-average method, the FIFO method is typically covered in more
advanced accounting courses.)

With processing, it is difficult to establish how much of each material, and exactly how much time is in each
unit of finished product. This will require the use of the equivalent unit computation, and management selects
the method (weighted average or FIFO) that best fits their information system.

Process costing can also be used by service organizations that provide homogeneous services and often do
not have inventory to value, such as a hotel reservation system. Although they have no inventory, the hotel
might want to know its costs per reservation for a period. They could allocate the total costs incurred by the
reservation system based on the number of inquiries they served. For example, assume that in a year they
incurred costs of $200,000 and served 50,000 potential guests. They could determine an average cost by
dividing costs by number of inquiries, or $200,000/50,000 = $4.00 per potential guest.

In the case of a not-for-profit company, the same process could be used to determine the average costs
incurred by a department that performs interviews. The department's costs would be allocated based on the
number of cases processed. For example, assume a not-for-profit pet adoption organization has an annual
budget of $180,000 and typically matches 900 shelter animals with new owners each year. The average cost
would be $200 per match.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 5 Process Costing                                                                                261

Similarities between Process Costing and Job Order Costing

Both process costing and job order costing maintain the costs of direct material, direct labor, and
manufacturing overhead. The process of production does not change because of the costing method. The
costing method is chosen based on the production process.

In job order cost production, the costs can be directly traced to the job, and the job cost sheet contains the
total expenses for that job. Process costing is optimal when the costs cannot be traced directly to the job. For
example, it would be impossible for David and William to trace the exact amount of eggs in each chocolate
chip cookie. It is also impossible to trace the exact amount of hickory in a drumstick. Even two sticks made
sequentially may have different weights because the wood varies in density. These types of manufacturing are
optimal for the process cost system.

The similarities between job order cost systems and process cost systems are the product costs of materials,
labor, and overhead, which are used determine the cost per unit, and the inventory values. The differences
between the two systems are shown in Table 5.1.

                           Differences between Job Order Costing and Process Costing

           Job Order Costing                         Process Costing

Product costs are traced to the product and          Product costs are traced to departments or
recorded on each job's individual job cost sheet.    processes.

Each department tracks its expenses and adds         Each department tracks its expenses, the number
them to the job cost sheet. As jobs move from one    of units started or transferred in, and the number
department to another, the job cost sheet moves to   of units transferred to the next department.
the next department as well.

Unit costs are computed using the job cost sheet.    Unit costs are computed using the departmental
                                                     costs and the equivalent units produced.

Finished goods inventory includes the products       Finished goods inventory is the number of units
completed but not sold, and all incomplete jobs are  completed at the per unit cost. Work in process
work in process inventory.                           inventory is the cost per unit and the equivalent
                                                     units remaining to be completed.

Table 5.1

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

Choosing Between Process Costing and Job Order Costing

Process costing and job order costing are both acceptable methods for tracking costs and production
levels. Some companies use a single method, while some companies use both, which creates a hybrid
costing system. The system a company uses depends on the nature of the product the company
manufactures.
262  Chapter 5 Process Costing

     Companies that mass produce a product allocate the costs to each department and use process costing.
     For example, General Mills uses process costing for its cereal, pasta, baking products, and pet foods. Job
     order systems are custom orders because the cost of the direct material and direct labor are traced
     directly to the job being produced. For example, Boeing uses job order costing to manufacture planes.

     When a company mass produces parts but allows customization on the final product, both systems are
     used; this is common in auto manufacturing. Each part of the vehicle is mass produced, and its cost is
     calculated with process costing. However, specific cars have custom options, so each individual car costs
     the sum of the specific parts used.

     THINK IT THROUGH

     Direct or Indirect Material

     Around Again is a wooden frame manufacturer. Wood and fastener metals are typically added at the
     beginning of the process and are easily tracked as direct material. Sometimes, after inspection, the
     product needs to be reworked and additional pieces are added. Because the frames have already been
     through each department, the additional work is typically minor and often entails simply adding an
     additional fastener to keep the back of the frame intact. Other times, all the frame needs is additional
     glue for a corner piece.

     How does a company differentiate between direct and indirect material? Many direct material costs, as
     the wood in the frame, are easy to identify as direct costs because the material is identifiable in the final
     product. But not all readily identifiable material is a direct material cost.

     Technology makes it easy to track costs as small as one fastener or ounce of glue. However, if each
     fastener had to be requisitioned and each ounce of glue recorded, the product would take longer to
     make and the direct labor cost would be higher. So, while it is possible to track the cost of each individual
     product, the additional information may not be worth the additional expense. Managerial accountants
     work with management to decide which products should be accounted for as direct material and tracked
     individually, versus which should be considered indirect material and allocated to the departments
     through overhead application.

     Should Around Again consider the fasteners or glue added after inspection as direct material or indirect
     material?

 5.2 Explain and Identify Conversion Costs

In a processing environment, there are two concepts important to determining the cost of products produced.
These are the concepts of equivalent units and conversion costs. As you have learned, equivalent units are the
number of units that would have been produced if one unit was completed before starting a second unit. For
example, four units that are one-fourth finished would equal one equivalent unit. Conversion costs are the
labor and overhead expenses that "convert" raw materials into a completed unit. Each department tracks its
conversion costs in order to determine the quantity and cost per unit (see TBD; we discuss this concept in
more detail later). Management often uses the cost information generated to set the sales price; to set

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 5 Process Costing                                                                                              263

standard usage data and price for material, labor, and overhead; and to allow management to evaluate the
efficiency of production and plan for the future.

Definition of Conversion Costs

Conversion costs are the total of direct labor and factory overhead costs. They are combined because it is the
labor and overhead together that convert the raw material into the finished product. Remember that factory,
manufacturing, or organizational overhead (you might see all three terms in practice) is composed of three
sources: indirect materials, indirect labor, and all other overhead costs that are not indirect materials or
indirect labor. Materials are often added in stages at discrete points of production, such as at the beginning,
middle, or end of a process, but conversion is usually applied equally throughout the process. For example, in
the opening example, David and William do not add direct material (ingredients) evenly throughout the
cookie-making process. They are all added at the beginning of the production process, so they begin with the
direct materials but add labor and overhead throughout the rest of the process.

Conversion costs can be explained through the process of making Just Born's Peeps. Just Born makes 5.5
million Peeps per day using three ingredients and the following process:[3]

 1. Use machines to add and mix the sugar, corn syrup, and gelatin into a mixture called a slurry. Send slurry
      through a whipper to give the marshmallow its fluffy texture.

 2. Color the sugar.
 3. Deposit marshmallows on sugar-coated belts in the Peep shape. Send Peeps on belts through a wind

      tunnel that stirs up the sugar to coat the entire shape.
 4. Add eyes, and inspect.
 5. Move the Peeps via belt into their appropriate tray, and wrap with cellophane.

In the Peep-making process, the direct materials of sugar, corn syrup, gelatin, color, and packaging materials
are added at the beginning of steps 1, 2, and 5. While the fully automated production does not need direct
labor, it does need indirect labor in each step to ensure the machines are operating properly and to perform
inspections (step 4).

Mechanics of Applying Conversion Costs

Let's return to our drumstick example to learn how to work with conversion costs. Rock City Percussion has
two departments critical to manufacturing drumsticks: the shaping and packaging departments.

The shaping department uses only wood as its direct material and water as its indirect material. In the shaping
department, the material is added first. Then, machines cut the wood underwater into dowels, separate them,
and move them to machines that shape the dowels into drumsticks. These machines need electricity to
operate and personnel to monitor and adjust the processes and to maintain the equipment. When the shaping
is finished, a conveyer belt transfers the sticks to the finishing department.

Since the drumsticks are made by performing one process on one batch at a time, instead of producing one
stick at a time from start to finish, it is difficult to determine the exact materials, labor, and overhead for a
single pair of drumsticks. It is easier to track the materials and conversion costs for one batch and have those
costs follow the batch to the next process.

Therefore, once the batch of sticks gets to the second process--the packaging department--it already has

3 Just Born. "Marshmallow Peeps Factory Tour." n.d. http://www.justborn.com/resource/corporate/popups/virtualTour.cfm
264  Chapter 5 Process Costing

costs attached to it. In other words, the packaging department receives both the drumsticks and their related
costs from the shaping department. For the basic size 5A stick, the packaging department adds material at the
beginning of the process. The 5A uses only packaging sleeves as its direct material, while other types may also
include nylon, felt, and/or the ingredients for the proprietary handgrip. Direct labor and manufacturing
overhead are used to test, weigh, and sound-match the drumsticks into pairs.
Thus, at the end of the accounting period, there are two work in process inventories: one in the shaping
department and one in the packaging department.
Direct materials are added at the beginning of shaping and packaging departments, so the work in process
inventory for those departments is 100% complete with regard to materials, but it is not complete with regard
to conversion costs. If they were 100% complete with regard to conversion costs, then they would have been
transferred to the next department.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Management needs to understand its costs in order to set prices, budget for the upcoming year, and
   evaluate performance. Sometimes individuals become managers due to their knowledge of the
   production process but not necessarily the costs. Managers can view this information on the importance
   of identifying prime and conversion costs (https://openstax.org/l/50PrimeConvCost) from Investopedia,
   a resource for managers.

 5.3 Explain and Compute Equivalent Units and Total Cost of Production in an
Initial Processing Stage

As described previously, process costing can have more than one work in process account. Determining the
value of the work in process inventory accounts is challenging because each product is at varying stages of
completion and the computation needs to be done for each department. Trying to determine the value of
those partial stages of completion requires application of the equivalent unit computation. The equivalent unit
computation determines the number of units if each is manufactured in its entirety before manufacturing the
next unit. For example, forty units that are 25% complete would be ten (40 × 25%) units that are totally
complete.

Direct material is added in stages, such as the beginning, middle, or end of the process, while conversion costs
are expensed evenly over the process. Often there is a different percentage of completion for materials than
there is for labor. For example, if material is added at the beginning of the process, the forty units that are
100% complete with respect to material and 25% complete with respect to conversion costs would be the same
as forty units of material and ten units (40 × 25%) completed with conversion costs.

For example, during the month of July, Rock City Percussion purchased raw material inventory of $25,000 for
the shaping department. Although each department tracks the direct material it uses in its own department,
all material is held in the material storeroom. The inventory will be requisitioned for each department as
needed.

During the month, Rock City Percussion's shaping department requested $10,179 in direct material and
started into production 8,700 hickory drumsticks of size 5A. There was no beginning inventory in the shaping

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 5 Process Costing  265

department, and 7,500 drumsticks were completed in that department and transferred to the finishing
department. Wood is the only direct material in the shaping department, and it is added at the beginning of
the process, so the work in process (WIP) is considered to be 100% complete with respect to direct materials.
At the end of the month, the drumsticks still in the shaping department were estimated to be 35% complete
with respect to conversion costs. All materials are added at the beginning of the shaping process. While
beginning the size 5A drumsticks, the shaping department incurred these costs in July:

These costs are then used to calculate the equivalent units and total production costs in a four-step process.

Step One: Determining the Units to Which Costs Will Be Assigned

In addition to the equivalent units, it is necessary to track the units completed as well as the units remaining in
ending inventory. A similar process is used to account for the costs completed and transferred. Reconciling the
number of units and the costs is part of the process costing system. The reconciliation involves the total of
beginning inventory and units started into production. This total is called "units to account for," while the total
of beginning inventory costs and costs added to production is called "costs to be accounted for." Knowing the
total units or costs to account for is helpful since it also equals the units or costs transferred out plus the
amount remaining in ending inventory.
When the new batch of hickory sticks was started on July 1, Rock City Percussion did not have any beginning
inventory and started 8,700 units, so the total number of units to account for in the reconciliation is 8,700:

The shaping department completed 7,500 units and transferred them to the testing and sorting department.
No units were lost to spoilage, which consists of any units that are not fit for sale due to breakage or other
imperfections. Since the maximum number of units that could possibly be completed is 8,700, the number of
units in the shaping department's ending inventory must be 1,200. The total of the 7,500 units completed and
transferred out and the 1,200 units in ending inventory equal the 8,700 possible units in the shaping
department.

Step Two: Computing the Equivalent Units of Production

All of the materials have been added to the shaping department, but all of the conversion elements have not;
the numbers of equivalent units for material costs and for conversion costs remaining in ending inventory are
different. All of the units transferred to the next department must be 100% complete with regard to that
266  Chapter 5 Process Costing

department's cost or they would not be transferred. So the number of units transferred is the same for
material units and for conversion units. The process cost system must calculate the equivalent units of
production for units completed (with respect to materials and conversion) and for ending work in process with
respect to materials and conversion.

For the shaping department, the materials are 100% complete with regard to materials costs and 35%
complete with regard to conversion costs. The 7,500 units completed and transferred out to the finishing
department must be 100% complete with regard to materials and conversion, so they make up 7,500 (7,500 ×
100%) units. The 1,200 ending work in process units are 100% complete with regard to material and have 1,200
(1,200 × 100%) equivalent units for material. The 1,200 ending work in process units are only 35% complete
with regard to conversion costs and represent 420 (1,200 × 35%) equivalent units.

Step Three: Determining the Cost per Equivalent Unit

Once the equivalent units for materials and conversion are known, the cost per equivalent unit is computed in
a similar manner as the units accounted for. The costs for material and conversion need to reconcile with the
total beginning inventory and the costs incurred for the department during that month.

The total materials costs for the period (including any beginning inventory costs) is computed and divided by
the equivalent units for materials. The same process is then completed for the total conversion costs. The total
of the cost per unit for material ($1.17) and for conversion costs ($2.80) is the total cost of each unit
transferred to the finishing department ($3.97).

Step Four: Allocating the Costs to the Units Transferred Out and Partially Completed in
the Shaping Department

Now you can determine the cost of the units transferred out and the cost of the units still in process in the
shaping department. To calculate the goods transferred out, simply take the units transferred out times the
sum of the two equivalent unit costs (materials and conversion) because all items transferred to the next
department are complete with respect to materials and conversion, so each unit brings all its costs. But the
ending WIP value is determined by taking the product of the work in process material units and the cost per
equivalent unit for materials plus the product of the work in process conversion units and the cost per
equivalent unit for conversion.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 5 Process Costing                                                                                      267

This information is accumulated in a production cost report. This report shows the costs used in the
preparation of a product, including the cost per unit for materials and conversion costs, and the amount of
work in process and finished goods inventory. A complete production cost report for the shaping department
is illustrated in Figure 5.6.

Figure 5.6 Production Cost Report for the Shaping Department. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

   YOUR TURN

   Calculating Inventory Transferred and Work in Process Costs

   Kyler Industries started a new batch of paint on October 1. The new batch consists of 8,700 cans of paint,
   of which 7,500 was completed and transferred to finished goods. During October, the manufacturing
   process recorded the following expenses: direct materials of $10,353; direct labor of $17,970; and applied
   overhead of $9,000. The inventory still in process is 100% complete with respect to materials and 30%
   complete with respect to conversion. What is the cost of inventory transferred out and work in process?
   Assume that there is no beginning work in process inventory.
   Solution
268  Chapter 5 Process Costing

 5.4 Explain and Compute Equivalent Units and Total Cost of Production in a
Subsequent Processing Stage

In many production departments, units are typically transferred from the initial stage to the next stage in the
process. When the units are transferred, the accumulated cost per unit is transferred along with them. Since
the unit being produced includes work from all of the prior departments, the transferred-in cost is the cost of
the work performed in all earlier departments.
When the hickory size 5A drumsticks have completed the shaping process, they are transferred to the
packaging department along with the inventory costs of $29,775. The inventory costs of $29,775 were $8,775
for materials and $21,000 for conversion costs and were calculated in Figure 5.6. During the month of July,
Rock City Percussion purchased raw material inventory of $2,000 for the packaging department. As with the
shaping department, the packaging department tracks its costs and requisitions the raw material from the
material storeroom. The packaging department has computed direct material costs of $2,000, direct labor
costs of $13,000, and applied overhead of $9,100, for a total of $22,100 in conversion costs. Equivalent units are
computed for this department, and a new cost per unit is computed.

As with calculating the equivalent units and total cost of production in the initial processing stage, there are
four steps for calculating these costs in a subsequent processing stage.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 5 Process Costing  269

Step One: Determining the Stage 2 Units to Which Costs Will Be Assigned

In the initial manufacturing department, there is beginning inventory, and units are started in production. In
subsequent stages, instead of starting new units, units are transferred in from the prior department, but the
accounting process is the same. Returning to the example, Rock City Percussion had a beginning inventory of
750 units in the packaging department. When the 7,500 sticks are transferred into the packaging department
from the shaping department, the total number of units to account for in the reconciliation is 8,250, which is
the total of the beginning WIP and the units transferred in:

The reconciliation of units to account for are the same for each department. The units that were completed
and transferred out plus the ending inventory equal the total units to account for. The packaging department
for Rock City Percussion completed 6,500 units and transferred them into finished goods inventory. Since the
maximum number of units to possibly be completed is 8,250 and no units were lost to spoilage, the number of
units in the packaging department's ending inventory must be 1,750. The total of the 6,500 units completed
and transferred out and the 1,750 units in ending inventory equal the 8,250 possible units in the packaging
department.

Step Two: Computing the Stage 2 Equivalent Units of Production

The only direct material added in the packaging department for the 5A sticks is packaging. The packaging
materials are added at the beginning of the process, so all the materials have been added before the units are
transferred out, but all of the conversion elements have not. As a result, the number of equivalent units for
material costs and for conversion costs remaining in ending inventory is different for the testing and sorting
department. As you've learned, all of the units transferred to the next department must be 100% complete
with regard to that department's cost, or they would not be transferred. The process cost system must
calculate the equivalent units of production for units completed (with respect to materials and conversion) and
for ending WIP with respect to materials and conversion.

For the packaging department, the materials are 100% complete with regard to materials costs and 40%
complete with regard to conversion costs. The 6,500 units completed and transferred out to the finishing
department must be 100% complete with regard to materials and conversion, so they make up 6,500 (6,500 ×
100%) units. The 1,750 ending WIP units are 100% complete with regard to material and have 1,750 (1,750 ×
100%) equivalent units for material. The 1,750 ending WIP units are only 40% complete with regard to
conversion costs and represent 700 (1,750 × 40%) equivalent units.
270  Chapter 5 Process Costing

Step Three: Determining the Stage 2 Cost per Equivalent Unit

Once the equivalent units for materials and conversion are known for the packaging department, the cost per
equivalent unit is computed in a manner similar to the calculation for the units accounted for. The costs for
material and conversion need to reconcile with the department's beginning inventory and the costs incurred
for the department during that month.

The total materials costs for the period (including any beginning inventory costs) are computed and divided by
the equivalent units for materials. The same process is then completed for the total conversion costs. The total
of the cost per unit for materials ($1.50) and for conversion costs ($6.90) is the total cost of each unit
transferred to the testing and sorting department.

Step Four: Allocating the Costs to the Units in the Finishing Department

Now you can determine the cost of the units transferred out and the cost of the units still in process in the
finishing department. For the goods transferred out, simply take the units transferred out times the sum of
the two equivalent unit costs (materials and conversion) because all items transferred to the next department
are complete with respect to materials and conversion, so each unit brings all its costs. But the ending WIP
value is determined by taking the product of the work in process materials units and the cost per equivalent
unit for materials plus the product of the work in process conversion units and the cost per equivalent unit for
conversion.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Knowing the cost to produce a unit is critical to management's decisions. Sometimes that knowledge
   leads to management's decision to stop production, but sometimes that decision isn't as simple as it
   seems. The cost to produce a penny is more than one cent, and yet, the United States still makes

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 5 Process Costing                                                                        271

pennies. See this article from Forbes that explains the difference among cost, worth, and value
(https://openstax.org/l/50CostValWorth) to learn more.

 5.5 Prepare Journal Entries for a Process Costing System

Calculating the costs associated with the various processes within a process costing system is only a part of
the accounting process. Journal entries are used to record and report the financial information relating to the
transactions. The example that follows illustrates how the journal entries reflect the process costing system by
recording the flow of goods and costs through the process costing environment.

Purchased Materials for Multiple Departments

Each department within Rock City Percussion has a separate work in process inventory account. Raw materials
totaling $33,500 were ordered prior to being requisitioned by each department: $25,000 for the shaping
department and $8,500 for the packaging department. The July 1 journal entry to record the purchases on
account is:

Direct Materials Requisitioned by the Shaping and Packaging Departments and Indirect
Material Used

During July, the shaping department requisitioned $10,179 in direct material. Similar to job order costing,
indirect material costs are accumulated in the manufacturing overhead account. The overhead costs are
applied to each department based on a predetermined overhead rate. In the example, assume that there was
an indirect material cost for water of $400 in July that will be recorded as manufacturing overhead. The journal
entry to record the requisition and usage of direct materials and overhead is:

During July, the packaging department requisitioned $2,000 in direct material and overhead costs for indirect
material totaled $300 for the month of July. The journal entry to record the requisition and usage of materials
is:
272  Chapter 5 Process Costing

Direct Labor Paid by All Production Departments

During July, the shaping department incurred $15,000 in direct labor costs and $600 in indirect labor. The
journal entry to record the labor costs is:

During July, the packaging department incurred $13,000 of direct labor costs and indirect labor of $1,000. The
journal entry to record the labor costs is:

Applied Manufacturing Overhead to All Production Departments

Manufacturing overhead includes indirect material, indirect labor, and other types of manufacturing overhead.
It is difficult, if not impossible, to trace manufacturing overhead to a specific product, and yet, the total cost
per unit needs to include overhead in order to make management decisions.
Overhead costs are accumulated in a manufacturing overhead account and applied to each department on the
basis of a predetermined overhead rate. Properly allocating overhead to each department depends on finding
an activity that provides a fair basis for the allocation. It needs to be an activity common to each department
and influential in driving the cost of manufacturing overhead. In traditional costing systems, the most
common activities used are machine hours, direct labor in dollars, or direct labor in hours. If the number of
machine hours can be related to the manufacturing overhead, the overhead can be applied to each
department based on the machine hours. The formula for overhead allocation is:

Rock City Percussion determined that machine hours is the appropriate base to use when allocating overhead.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 5 Process Costing                                                                                    273

The estimated annual overhead cost is $340,000 per year. It was also estimated that the total machine hours
will be 34,000 hours, so the allocation rate is computed as:

The shaping department used 700 machine hours, and with an overhead application rate of $10 per direct
labor hour, the journal entry to record the overhead allocation is:

The finishing department used 910 machine hours, and with an overhead application rate of $10 per direct
labor hour, the journal entry to record the overhead allocation is:

Transferred Costs of Finished Goods from the Shaping Department to the Packaging
Department

When the units are transferred from the shaping department to the packaging department, they are
transferred at $3.97 per unit, as calculated previously. The amount transferred from the shaping department is
the same amount listed on the production cost report in Figure 5.6. The journal entry is:

Transferred Goods from the Packaging Department to Finished Goods

The computation of inventory for the packaging department is shown in Figure 5.7.
274  Chapter 5 Process Costing

Figure 5.7 Inventory Computation for Packaging Department. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
The value of the inventory transferred to finished goods in the production cost report is the same as in the
journal entry:

Recording the Cost of Goods Sold Out of the Finished Goods Inventory

Each unit is a package of two drumsticks that cost $8.40 to make and sells for $24.99. There are two
transactions when recording a sale. One entry is to transfer the inventory from finished goods inventory to

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 5 Process Costing                                                                                        275

cost of goods sold and is at the cost of the product. The second transaction is to record the sale at the sales
price. The compound entry to record both transactions for the sale of 500 units on account is:

LINK TO LEARNING

The importance of properly recording the production process is illustrated in this report on work in
process inventory (https://openstax.org/l/50WorkInProcess) from InventoryOps.com.
276                                                                               Chapter 5 Process Costing

     Key Terms

conversion cost total of labor and overhead for a product; the costs that "convert" the direct material into
     the finished product

equivalent units number of units that would have been produced if the units were produced sequentially
     and in their entirety in a particular time period

expense recognition principle (also, matching principle) matches expenses with associated revenues in the
     period in which the revenues were generated

manufacturing costs (also, product costs) total of all costs expended in the manufacturing process;
     generally consists of direct material, direct labor, and manufacturing overhead

period costs typically related to a particular time period instead of attached to the production of an asset;
     treated as an expense in the period incurred (examples include many sales and administrative expenses)

prime costs direct material expenses and direct labor costs
process costing costing system used when a standardized process is used to manufacture identical products

     and the direct material, direct labor, and manufacturing overhead cannot be traced to a specific unit
product costs all expenses required to manufacture the product: direct materials, direct labor, and

     manufacturing overhead
production cost report shows the costs used in the preparation of a product, including the cost per unit for

     materials and conversion costs and the amount of work in process and finished goods inventory
selling and administrative (S&A) expenses period costs not directly assigned to the items produced or

     services provided; include costs of departments not directly associated with manufacturing but necessary
     to operate the business
spoilage any units that are not fit for sale due to breakage or other imperfections

     Summary

5.1 Compare and Contrast Job Order Costing and Process Costing
  · The three categories of costs incurred in producing an item are direct material, direct labor, and
      manufacturing overhead.
  · Process costing is the system of accumulating costs within each department for large-volume, mass-
      produced units.
  · Process costing often groups direct labor and manufacturing overhead as conversion costs.
  · Costs under GAAP are categorized as period costs when they are not related to production and instead
      cover a time period.
  · Selling and administrative costs are period costs related to the sales of products and management of the
      company and are not directly tied to a specific product.
  · Process costing determines the cost per unit through the use of equivalent units, or the number of units
      that would have been produced if production was sequential instead of in batches.

5.2 Explain and Identify Conversion Costs
  · Conversion costs are the costs of direct labor and manufacturing overhead used to convert raw materials
      into a finished product.
  · Materials are added during various stages of the manufacturing process, such as the beginning or end,
      while conversion of the product from raw material into finished goods is considered to occur uniformly
      through the process. Thus, it is possible for a product to have all of its materials and not be complete.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 5 Process Costing                                                                                     277

  · Equivalent units for direct materials can be different than the equivalent units for conversion costs
      because materials are added in steps through the manufacturing process, while conversion costs are
      incurred evenly throughout the process.

5.3 Explain and Compute Equivalent Units and Total Cost of Production in an Initial Processing Stage
  · Process costing has a work in process inventory account for each department.
  · Equivalent units of production for materials may differ from the equivalent units for conversion costs.
  · The total units to account for is the number of units in the beginning work in process inventory plus the
      number of units started into production; this total also represents the sum of the number of units
      completed and the number of units in the ending work in process inventory.
  · The cost per equivalent unit for materials is the total of the material costs for the beginning work in
      process inventory and the total of material costs incurred during the period.
  · The cost per equivalent unit for conversion costs is the total of the conversion costs for the beginning
      work in process inventory and the total of conversion costs incurred during the period.
  · The cost of units transferred to the next department is the number of units transferred times the total of
      the cost per equivalent unit of material plus the cost per equivalent unit for conversion costs.

5.4 Explain and Compute Equivalent Units and Total Cost of Production in a Subsequent Processing
Stage

  · The total units to account for is the number of units in the beginning work in process inventory plus the
      number of units transferred from the prior department; this total also represents the number of units
      completed plus the number of units in the ending work in process inventory.

  · The cost per equivalent units for materials is the total of the material costs for the beginning work in
      process inventory plus the cost of material transferred in to the department plus the total of material
      costs incurred during the period.

  · The cost per equivalent unit for conversion costs is the total of the conversion costs for the beginning
      work in process inventory plus the conversion costs transferred in plus the total of conversion costs
      incurred during the period.

5.5 Prepare Journal Entries for a Process Costing System
  · Traditional journal entries show the purchase of material and the incurring of overhead costs.
  · Each department records the transfer of material from the storeroom into production, its direct labor
      costs, the application of overhead, and the transfer of goods to the next department or finished goods.
  · The value of the inventory transferred to the next department or to finished goods equals the amount
      listed as transferred on the production cost report.

     Multiple Choice

1. 5.1 Which of the following production characteristics is better suited for process costing and not job
order costing?

    A. Each product batch is distinguishable from the prior batch.
    B. The costs are easily traced to a specific product.
    C. Costs are accumulated by department.
    D. The value of work in process is the direct material used, the direct labor incurred, and the overhead

          applied to the job in process.
278                                                                               Chapter 5 Process Costing

2. 5.1 A process costing system is most likely used by which of the following?
    A. airplane manufacturing
    B. a paper manufacturing company
    C. an accounting firm specializing in tax returns
    D. a hospital

3. 5.1 Which of the following is a prime cost?
    A. direct labor
    B. work in process inventory
    C. administrative labor
    D. factory maintenance expenses

4. 5.1 Which of the following is a conversion cost?
    A. raw materials
    B. direct labor
    C. sales commissions
    D. direct material used

5. 5.1 During production, how are the costs in process costing accumulated?
    A. to cost of goods sold
    B. to each individual product
    C. to manufacturing overhead
    D. to each individual department

6. 5.2 Which is not needed to compute equivalent units of production?
    A. the percentage of completion for inventory still in process
    B. the number of units transferred out
    C. the number of units started and completed
    D. the material cost per unit

7. 5.2 What is the cost of direct labor if the conversion costs are $330,000 and manufacturing overhead is
$275,000?

    A. $55,000
    B. $275,000
    C. $330,000
    D. $605,000

8. 5.2 What is the conversion cost to manufacture insulated travel cups if the costs are: direct materials,
$17,000; direct labor, $33,000; and manufacturing overhead, $70,000?

    A. $16,000
    B. $50,000
    C. $103,000
    D. $120,000

9. 5.2 Which of the following lists contains only conversion costs for an inflatable raft manufacturing
corporation?

    A. vinyl for raft, machine operator, electricity, insurance
    B. machine operator, electricity, depreciation, plastic for air valves
    C. machine operator, electricity, depreciation, insurance
    D. vinyl for raft, electricity, insurance, plastic for air valves

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 5 Process Costing                                                                             279

10. 5.3 Direct material costs $3 per unit, direct labor costs $5 per unit, and overhead is applied at the rate of
100% of the direct labor cost. What is the value of the inventory transferred to the next department if
beginning inventory was 2,000 units; 9,000 units were started; and 1,000 units were in ending inventory?

    A. $1,000
    B. $13,000
    C. $130,000
    D. $20,000

11. 5.3 Beginning inventory and direct material cost added during the month total $55,000. What is the
value of the ending work in process inventory if beginning inventory was 2,000 units; 9,000 units were started;
and 1,000 units were in ending inventory?

    A. $1,000
    B. $5,000
    C. $50,000
    D. $55,000

12. 5.3 The initial processing department had a beginning inventory of 750 units and an ending inventory of
1,350 units, and it started 9,500 units into production. How many were transferred out to the next department?

A. 750
B. 1,350
C. 8,900
D. 10,250

13. 5.3 There were 1,000 units in ending inventory after transferring 16,000 units to finished goods
inventory. If the beginning inventory was 2,000 units, how many units were started in process?

    A. 1,000
    B. 2,000
    C. 15,000
    D. 17,000

14.     5.4 The costs to be accounted for consist of which of the following?
    A.  costs added during the period
    B.  costs of the units in ending inventory
    C.  costs started and transferred during the period
    D.  costs in the beginning inventory and costs added during the period

15.     5.4 Which of the following is the step in which materials, labor, and overhead are detailed?
    A.  determining the units to which costs are assigned
    B.  determining the equivalent units of production
    C.  determining the cost per equivalent units
    D.  allocating the costs to the units transferred out and the units partially completed
280                                                                                Chapter 5 Process Costing

16. 5.5 The journal entry to record the $500 of work in process ending inventory that consists of $300 of
direct materials, $50 of manufacturing overhead, and $150 od direct labor is which of the following?

    A.

     B.

     C.
     D.

17.      5.5 Assigning indirect costs to departments is completed by ________.
    A.   applying the predetermined overhead rate
    B.   debiting the manufacturing costs incurred
    C.   applying the costs to manufacturing overhead
    D.   applying the costs to work in process inventory

18.      5.5 In a process costing system, which account shows the overhead assigned to the department?
    A.   cost of goods sold
    B.   finished goods inventory
    C.   raw material inventory
    D.   work in process inventory

19.      5.5 In a process cost system, factory depreciation expense incurred is debited to ________.
    A.   finished goods inventory
    B.   work in process inventory
    C.   manufacturing overhead
    D.   cost of goods sold

     Questions

1. 5.1 Explain how process costing differs from job order costing.
2. 5.1 Would a pharmaceutical manufacturer use process or job order costing? Why?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 5 Process Costing                                                                                         281

3. 5.1 Which costs are assigned using the weighted-average method?
4. 5.1 What is the primary purpose of process costing?
5. 5.2 What is the difference between prime costs and conversion costs?
6. 5.2 Explain conversion costs using an example.
7. 5.2 Why are there conversion costs in both job order costing and process costing?
8. 5.2 What are equivalent units of production, and how are they used in process costing?
9. 5.2 How can there be a different number of equivalent units for materials as compared to conversion
costs?
10. 5.2 Why is the number of equivalent units for materials only sometimes equal to the equivalent units
for conversion?
11. 5.3 What are the four steps involved in determining the cost of inventory transferred from one
department to the next and the cost of work in process inventory?
12. 5.3 What is the weighted-average method for computing the equivalent units of production?
13. 5.4 How does process costing treat the costs transferred in from another department?
14. 5.4 Why does each department have its own work in process inventory?
15. 5.5 Match each term with its description.

A. conversion costs        i. total of direct material costs and direct labor costs
                           ii. manufacturing costs of the items sold
B. cost of goods sold      iii. number of units produced if each unit was produced sequentially

C. cost of production      iv. total of direct labor costs, indirect labor costs, indirect material costs, and
report                     manufacturing overhead
                           v. where costs in a process cost system are reported before being applied to the
D. cost per equivalent     product
unit                       vi. detailed listing of the total costs of the product including the value of work in
                           process
E. equivalent units of     vii. cost of materials or conversion for a specific department during production
production                 viii. product of the total cost per unit and the number of units completed and
                           transferred during the time period
F. manufacturing
department

G. prime costs

H. transferred out
costs

16. 5.5 How is manufacturing overhead handled in a process cost system?
17. 5.5 How are predetermined overhead rates used in process costing?
282                                                                               Chapter 5 Process Costing

     Exercise Set A

EA1. 5.1 How many units were started into production in a period if there were zero units of beginning
work in process inventory, 1,100 units in ending work in process inventory, and 21,500 completed and
transferred out units?

EA2. 5.1 A company started a new product, and in the first month started 100,000 units. The ending work in
process inventory was 20,000 units that were 100% complete with materials and 75% complete with conversion
costs. There were 100,000 units to account for, and the equivalent units for materials was $6 per unit while the
equivalent units for conversion was $8 per unit. What is the value of the inventory transferred out, using the
weighted-average inventory method?

EA3. 5.3 Given the following information, determine the equivalent units of ending work in process for
materials and conversion under the weighted-average method:

      · beginning inventory of 2,500 units is 100% complete with regard to materials and 60% complete with
          regard to conversion

      · 18,000 units were started during the period
      · 17,500 units were completed and transferred
      · ending inventory is 100% complete with materials and 65% complete with conversion

EA4. 5.3 There were 1,700 units in beginning inventory that were 40% complete with regard to conversion.
During the month, 8,550 units were started and 9,000 were transferred to finished goods. The ending work in
process was 60% complete with regard to conversion costs, and materials are added at the beginning of the
process. What is the total amount of equivalent units for materials and conversion at the end of the month
using the weighted-average method?

EA5. 5.3 A company has 1,500 units in ending work in process that are 30% complete after transferring out
10,000 units. All materials are added at the beginning of the process. If the cost per unit is $4 for materials and
$7 for conversion, what is the cost of units transferred out and in ending work in process inventory using the
weighted-average method?

EA6. 5.3 There were 2,400 units in ending work in process inventory that were 100% complete with regard
to material and 25% complete with regard to conversion costs. Ending work in process inventory had a cost of
$9,000 and a per-unit material cost of $2. What was the conversion cost per unit using the weighted-average
method?

EA7. 5.3 How many units must be in ending inventory if beginning inventory was 15,000 units, 55,000 units
were started, and 57,000 units were completed and transferred out?

EA8. 5.3 How many units must have been completed and transferred if beginning inventory was 75,000
units, ending inventory was 72,000 units, and 290,000 units were started?

EA9. 5.3 Using the weighted-average method, compute the equivalent units of production if the beginning
inventory consisted of 20,000 units; 55,000 units were started in production; and 57,000 units were completed
and transferred to finished goods inventory. For this process, materials are added at the beginning of the
process, and the units are 35% complete with respect to conversion.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 5 Process Costing  283

EA10. 5.3 Using the weighted-average method, compute the equivalent units of production for a new
company that started 85,000 units into production and transferred 67,000 to the second department. Assume
that beginning inventory was 0. Conversion is considered to occur evenly throughout the process, while
materials are added at the beginning of the process. The ending inventory for Equivalent Units: Conversion is
9,000 units.

EA11. 5.3 Mazomanie Farm completed 20,000 units during the quarter and has 2,500 units still in process.
The units are 100% complete with regard to materials and 55% complete with regard to conversion costs. What
are the equivalent units for materials and conversion?

EA12. 5.3 What are the total costs to account for if a company's beginning inventory had $231,432 in
materials, $186,450 in conversion costs, and added direct material costs ($4,231,392), direct labor ($2,313,392),
and manufacturing overhead ($1,156,696)?

EA13. 5.3 A company started the month with 8,329 units in work in process inventory. It started 23,142 units
and had an ending inventory of 9,321. The units were 100% complete to materials and 67% complete with
conversion. How many units were transferred out during the period?

EA14. 5.4 A production department within a company received materials of $10,000 and conversion costs of
$10,000 from the prior department. It added material of $27,200 and conversion costs of $53,000. The
equivalent units are 20,000 for material and 18,000 for conversion. What is the unit cost for materials and
conversion?

EA15. 5.4 Production data show 35,920 units were transferred out of a stage of production and 6,150 units
remained in ending WIP inventory that was 100% complete to material and 35% complete to conversion. The
unit material cost is $5 for material and $8 for conversion. What is the amount of inventory transferred out
and remaining in ending work in process inventory?

EA16. 5.5 Overhead is assigned to the manufacturing department at the rate of $10 per machine hour.
There were 3,500 machine hours during October in the shaping department and 2,500 in the packaging
department. Prepare the journal entry to apply overhead to the manufacturing departments.

EA17. 5.5 Prepare the journal entry to record the factory wages of $28,000 incurred for a single production
department assuming payment will be made in the next pay period.

EA18. 5.5 Prepare the journal entry to record the transfer of 3,000 units from the packaging department to
finished goods if the material cost per unit is $4 and the conversion cost per unit is $5.50.

EA19. 5.5 Prepare the journal entry to record the sale of 2,000 units that cost $8 per unit and sold for $15
per unit.
284                                                                               Chapter 5 Process Costing

  B Exercise Set B

EB1. 5.3 Given the following information, determine the equivalent units of ending work in process for
materials and conversion using the weighted-average method:

      · Beginning inventory of 750 units is 100% complete with regard to materials and 30% complete with
          regard to conversion.

      · 9,500 units were started during the period.
      · 8,900 units were completed and transferred.
      · Ending inventory is 100% complete with regard to materials and 68% complete with regard to

          conversion.

EB2. 5.3 There were 2,000 units in beginning inventory that were 70% complete with regard to conversion.
During the month, 15,000 units were started, and 16,000 were transferred to finished goods. The ending work
in process was 55% complete with regard to conversion costs, and materials are added at the beginning of the
process. What is the total amount of equivalent units for materials and conversion at the end of the month
using the weighted-average method?

EB3. 5.3 A company has 100 units in ending work in process that are 40% complete after transferring out
750 units. If the cost per unit is $5 for materials and $2.50 for conversion, what is the cost of units transferred
out and in ending work in process inventory using the weighted-average method?

EB4. 5.3 There were 1,500 units in ending work in process inventory that were 100% complete with regard
to material and 60% complete with regard to conversion costs. Ending work in process inventory had a cost of
$7,200 and a per-unit material cost of $3. What was the conversion cost per unit using the weighted-average
method?

EB5. 5.3 Using the weighted-average method, compute the equivalent units of production if the beginning
inventory consisted of 20,000 units, 55,000 units were started in production, and 57,000 units were completed
and transferred to finished goods inventory. For this process, materials are 70% complete and the units are
30% complete with respect to conversion.

EB6. 5.3 What are the total costs to account for if a company's beginning inventory had $23,432 in materials
and $18,450 in conversion costs, and added direct material costs ($41,392), direct labor ($23,192), and
manufacturing overhead ($62,500)?

EB7. 5.3 A company started the month with 4,519 units in work in process inventory. It started 15,295 units
and had an ending inventory of 4,936. The units were 100% complete to materials and 30% complete with
conversion. How many units were transferred out during the period?

EB8. 5.4 A production department within a company received materials of $7,000 and conversion costs of
$5,000 from the prior department. It added material of $78,400 and conversion costs of $47,000. The
equivalent units are 5,000 for material and 4,000 for conversion. What is the unit cost for materials and
conversion?

EB9. 5.4 Production data show 15,200 units were transferred out of a stage of production and 3,500 units
remained in ending WIP inventory that was 100% complete to material and 60% complete to conversion. The
unit material cost is $9 for material and $4 for conversion. What is the amount of inventory transferred out
and remaining in ending work in process inventory?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 5 Process Costing                                                                               285

EB10. 5.5 Overhead is assigned to the manufacturing department at the rate of $5 per machine hour. There
were 3,000 machine hours used in the molding department. Prepare the journal entry to apply overhead to the
manufacturing department.

EB11. 5.5 Prepare the journal entry to record the factory wages of $25,000 incurred in the processing
department and $15,000 incurred in the production department assuming payment will be made in the next
pay period.

EB12. 5.5 Prepare the journal entry to record the transfer of 3,500 units from the separation department to
the mash department if the material cost per unit is $2 and the conversion cost per unit is $5.

EB13.  5.5 Prepare the journal entry to record the sale of 700 units that cost $5 per unit and sold for $15 per
unit.
286                                                                               Chapter 5 Process Costing

     Problem Set A

PA1. 5.1 The following product costs are available for Haworth Company on the production of chairs: direct
materials, $15,500; direct labor, $22,000; manufacturing overhead, $16,500; selling expenses, $6,900; and
administrative expenses, $15,200.

    A. What are the prime costs?
    B. What are the conversion costs?
    C. What is the total product cost?
    D. What is the total period cost?
    E. If 7,750 equivalent units are produced, what is the equivalent material cost per unit?
    F. If 22,000 equivalent units are produced, what is the equivalent conversion cost per unit?

PA2. 5.1 The following product costs are available for Arrez Company on the production of DVD cases:
direct materials, $1,450; direct labor, $15.50; manufacturing overhead, applied at 150% of direct labor cost;
selling expenses, $1,550; and administrative expenses, $950. The direct labor hours worked for the month are
90 hours.

    A. What are the prime costs?
    B. What are the conversion costs?
    C. What is the total product cost?
    D. What is the total period cost?
    E. If 1,450 equivalent units are produced, what is the equivalent material cost per unit?
    F. What is the equivalent conversion cost per unit?

PA3. 5.3 Pant Risers manufactures bands for self-dressing assistive devices for mobility-impaired
individuals. Manufacturing is a one-step process where the bands are cut and sewn. This is the information
related to this year's production:

Ending inventory was 100% complete as to materials and 70% complete as to conversion, and the total
materials cost is $57,540 and the total conversion cost is $36,036. Using the weighted-average method, what
are the unit costs if the company transferred out 17,000 units? What is the value of the inventory transferred
out and the value of the ending WIP inventory?

PA4. 5.3 During March, the following costs were charged to the manufacturing department: $14,886 for
materials; $14,656 for labor; and $13,820 for manufacturing overhead. The records show that 30,680 units
were completed and transferred, while 2,400 remained in ending inventory. There were 33,080 equivalent units
of material and 31,640 of conversion costs. Using the weighted-average method, what is the cost of inventory
transferred and the balance in work in process inventory?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 5 Process Costing                                                                               287

PA5. 5.3 Materials are added at the beginning of a production process, and ending work in process
inventory is 30% complete with respect to conversion costs. Use the information provided to complete a
production cost report using the weighted-average method.

PA6. 5.3 Narwhal Swimwear has a beginning work in process inventory of 13,500 units and transferred in
130,000 units before ending the month with 14,000 units that were 100% complete with regard to materials
and 30% complete with regard to conversion costs. The cost per unit of material is $5.80 and the cost per unit
for conversion is $8.20 per unit. Using the weighted-average method, what is the amount of material and
conversion costs assigned to the department for the month?
PA7. 5.3 The following data show the units in beginning work in process inventory, the number of units
started, the number of units transferred, and the percent completion of the ending work in process for
conversion. Given that materials are added at the beginning of the process, what are the equivalent units for
material and conversion costs for each quarter using the weighted-average method? Assume that the
quarters are independent.

PA8. 5.4 The finishing department started the month with 700 units in WIP inventory. It received 2,200 units
from the molding department and transferred out 2,150 units. How many units were in process at the end of
the month?
PA9. 5.4 The packaging department began the month with 500 units that were 100% complete with regard
to material and 85% complete with regard to conversion. It received 9,500 units from the processing
department and ended the month with 750 units that were 100% complete with regard to materials and 30%
complete with regard to conversion. With a $5 per unit cost for conversion and a $5 per unit cost for materials,
what is the cost of the units transferred out and remaining in ending inventory?
PA10. 5.4 Production information shows these costs and units for the smoothing department in August.

All materials are added at the beginning of the period. The ending work in process is 30% complete as to
conversion. What is the value of the inventory transferred to finished goods and the value of the WIP inventory
at the end of the month?
288                                                                               Chapter 5 Process Costing

PA11. 5.4 Given the following information, prepare a production report with materials added at the
beginning and ending work in process inventory being 25% complete with regard to conversion costs.

PA12. 5.4 Complete this production cost report:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 5 Process Costing                                                289

PA13. 5.5 Selected information from Skylar Studios shows the following:

Prepare journal entries to record the following:

    A. raw material purchased
    B. direct labor incurred
    C. depreciation expense (hint: this is part of manufacturing overhead)
    D. raw materials used
    E. overhead applied on the basis of $0.50 per machine hour
    F. the transfer from department 1 to department 2

PA14. 5.5 Loanstar had 100 units in beginning inventory before starting 950 units and completing 800 units.
The beginning work in process inventory consisted of $2,000 in materials and $5,000 in conversion costs
before $8,500 of materials and $11,200 of conversion costs were added during the month. The ending WIP
inventory was 100% complete with regard to materials and 40% complete with regard to conversion costs.
Prepare the journal entry to record the transfer of inventory from the manufacturing department to the
finished goods department.

  B Problem Set B

PB1. 5.3 The following product costs are available for Stellis Company on the production of erasers: direct
materials, $22,000; direct labor, $35,000; manufacturing overhead, $17,500; selling expenses, $17,600; and
administrative expenses; $13,400.

    A. What are the prime costs?
    B. What are the conversion costs?
    C. What is the total product cost?
    D. What is the total period cost?
    E. If 13,750 equivalent units are produced, what is the equivalent material cost per unit?
    F. If 17,500 equivalent units are produced, what is the equivalent conversion cost per unit?
290                                                                               Chapter 5 Process Costing

PB2. 5.3 The following product costs are available for Kellee Company on the production of eyeglass
frames: direct materials, $32,125; direct labor, $23.50; manufacturing overhead, applied at 225% of direct labor
cost; selling expenses, $22,225; and administrative expenses, $31,125. The direct labor hours worked for the
month are 3,200 hours.

    A. What are the prime costs?
    B. What are the conversion costs?
    C. What is the total product cost?
    D. What is the total period cost?
    E. If 6,425 equivalent units are produced, what is the equivalent material cost per unit?
    F. What is the equivalent conversion cost per unit?

PB3. 5.3 Vexar manufactures nails. Manufacturing is a one-step process where the nails are forged. This is
the information related to this year's production:

Ending inventory was 100% complete as to materials and 70% complete as to conversion, and the total
materials cost is $115,080 and the total conversion cost is $72,072. Using the weighted-average method, what
are the unit costs if the company transferred out 34,000 units? Using the weighted-average method, prepare
the company's process cost summary for the month.

PB4. 5.3 During March, the following costs were charged to the manufacturing department: $22,500 for
materials; $45,625 for labor; and $50,000 for manufacturing overhead. The records show that 40,000 units
were completed and transferred, while 10,000 remained in ending inventory. There were 45,000 equivalent
units of material and 42,500 units of conversion costs. Using the weighted-average method, prepare the
company's process cost summary for the month.

PB5. 5.3 Ardt-Barger has a beginning work in process inventory of 5,500 units and transferred in 25,000
units before ending the month with 3,000 units that were 100% complete with regard to materials and 80%
complete with regard to conversion costs. The cost per unit of material is $5.45, and the cost per unit for
conversion is $6.20 per unit. Using the weighted-average method, prepare the company's process cost
summary for the month.

PB6. 5.3 The following data show the units in beginning work in process inventory, the number of units
started, the number of units transferred, and the percent completion of the ending work in process for
conversion. Given that materials are added at the beginning of the process, what are the equivalent units for
material and conversion costs for each quarter using the weighted-average method? Assume that the
quarters are independent.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 5 Process Costing  291

PB7. 5.3 The following data show the units in beginning work in process inventory, the number of units
started, the number of units transferred, and the percent completion of the ending work in process for
conversion. Given that materials are added 50% at the beginning of the process and 50% at the end of the
process, what are the equivalent units for material and conversion costs for each quarter using the weighted-
average method? Assume that the quarters are independent.

PB8. 5.3 The following data show the units in beginning work in process inventory, the number of units
started, the number of units transferred, and the percent completion of the ending work in process for
conversion. Given that materials are added 50% at the beginning of the process and 50% at the end of the
process, what are the equivalent units for material and conversion costs for each quarter using the weighted-
average method? Assume that the quarters are independent.

PB9. 5.4 The finishing department started the month with 600 units in WIP inventory. It received 1,500 units
from the molding department and ended the month with 550 units still in process. How many units were
transferred out?

PB10. 5.4 The packaging department began the month with 750 units that were 100% complete with regard
to material and 25% complete with regard to conversion. It received 9,500 units from the processing
department and ended the month with 500 units that were 100% complete with regard to materials and 75%
complete with regard to conversion. With a $7 per unit material cost and a $4 per unit cost for conversion,
what is the cost of the units transferred out and remaining in ending inventory?

PB11. 5.4 Production information shows these costs and units for the smoothing department in August.

What is the value of the inventory transferred out to finished goods and the value of the WIP inventory at the
end of the month, assuming conversion costs are 30% complete?
292                                                                             Chapter 5 Process Costing

PB12. 5.4 Given the following information, prepare a production report with materials added at the
beginning and ending work in process inventory being 80% complete with regard to conversion costs.

PB13. 5.5 Selected information from Hernandez Corporation shows the following:

Prepare journal entries to record the following:
    A. raw material purchased
    B. direct labor incurred
    C. depreciation expense (hint: this is part of manufacturing overhead)
    D. raw materials used
    E. overhead applied on the basis of $0.50 per machine hour
    F. the transfer from department 1 to department 2

PB14. 5.5 Rexar had 1,000 units in beginning inventory before starting 9,500 units and completing 8,000
units. The beginning work in process inventory consisted of $5,000 in materials and $8,500 in conversion costs
before $16,000 of materials and $18,500 of conversion costs were added during the month. The ending WIP
inventory was 100% complete with regard to materials and 40% complete with regard to conversion costs.
Prepare the journal entry to record the transfer of inventory from the manufacturing department to the
finished goods department.

     Thought Provokers

TP1. 5.1 How would process costing exist in a service industry?
TP2. 5.2 Why are labor and manufacturing overhead grouped together as conversion costs?
TP3. 5.4 How is process costing for a single manufacturing department different from a manufacturing
company with multiple departments?
TP4. 5.5 What is different between the journal entries for process costing and that of job order costing?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
     6

              Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing

Figure 6.1 Allocating Time. The number of activities is one way to determine how resources, such as time, are
allocated. (credit: modification of work by West Point - The U.S. Military Academy/Flickr, CC BY 2.0;
modification of work by United States Government/Flickr, Public Domain; modification of "training" by Cory
Zanker/Flickr, CC BY 4.0)

 Chapter Outline

  6.1 Calculate Predetermined Overhead and Total Cost under the Traditional Allocation Method
  6.2 Describe and Identify Cost Drivers
  6.3 Calculate Activity-Based Product Costs
  6.4 Compare and Contrast Traditional and Activity-Based Costing Systems
  6.5 Compare and Contrast Variable and Absorption Costing

      Why It Matters

   Barry thinks of his education as a job and spends forty hours a week in class or studying. Barry estimates he
   has about eighty hours per week to allocate between school and other activities and believes everyone should
   follow his fifty-fifty rule of time allocation. His roommate, Kamil, disagrees with Barry and argues that
   allocating 50 percent of one's time to class and studying is not a great formula because everyone has different
   activities and responsibilities. Kamil points out, for example, that he has a job tutoring other students, is
   involved with student activities, and plays in a band, while Barry spends some of his nonstudy time doing
   volunteer work and working out.
   Kamil plans each week based on how many hours he will need for each activity: classes, studying and
   coursework, tutoring, and practicing and performing with his band. In essence, he considers the details of
   each week's needs to budget his time. Kamil explains to Barry that being aware of the activities that consume
   his limited resources (time, in this example) helps him to better plan his week. He adds that individuals who
294  Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing

have activities with lots of time commitments (class, work, study, exercise, family, friends, and so on) must be
efficient with their time or they risk doing poorly in one or more areas. Kamil argues these individuals cannot
simply assign a percentage of their time to each activity but should use each specific activity as the basis for
allocating their time. Barry insists that assigning a set percentage to everything is easy and the better method.
Who is correct?

 6.1 Calculate Predetermined Overhead and Total Cost under the Traditional
Allocation Method

Both roommates make valid points about allocating limited resources. Ultimately, each must decide which
method to use to allocate time, and they can make that decision based on their own analyses. Similarly,
businesses and other organizations must create an allocation system for assigning limited resources, such as
overhead. Whereas Kamil and Barry are discussing the allocation of hours, the issue of allocating costs raises
similar questions. For example, for a manufacturer allocating maintenance costs, which are an overhead cost,
is it better to allocate to each production department equally by the number of machines that need to be
maintained or by the square footage of space that needs to be maintained?

In the past, overhead costs were typically allocated based on factors such as total direct labor hours, total
direct labor costs, or total machine hours. This allocation process, often called the traditional allocation
method, works most effectively when direct labor is a dominant component in production. However, many
industries have evolved, primarily due to changes in technology, and their production processes have become
more complicated, with more steps or components. Many of these industries have significantly reduced their
use of direct labor and replaced it with technology, such as robotics or other machinery. For example, a mobile
phone production facility in China replaced 90 percent of its workforce with robots.[1]

In these situations, a direct cost (labor) has been replaced by an overhead cost (e.g., depreciation on
equipment). Because of this decrease in reliance on labor and/or changes in the types of production
complexity and methods, the traditional method of overhead allocation becomes less effective in certain
production environments. To account for these changes in technology and production, many organizations
today have adopted an overhead allocation method known as activity-based costing (ABC). This chapter will
explain the transition to ABC and provide a foundation in its mechanics.

Activity-based costing is an accounting method that recognizes the relationship between product costs and a
production activity, such as the number of hours of engineering or design activity, the costs of the set up or
preparation for the production of different products, or the costs of packaging different products after the
production process is completed. Overhead costs are then allocated to production according to the use of that
activity, such as the number of machine setups needed. In contrast, the traditional allocation method
commonly uses cost drivers, such as direct labor or machine hours, as the single activity.

Because of the use of multiple activities as cost drivers, ABC costing has advantages over the traditional
allocation method, which assigns overhead using a single predetermined overhead rate. Those advantages
come at a cost, both in resources and time, since additional information needs to be collected and analyzed.
Chrysler, for instance, shifted its overhead allocation to ABC in 1991 and estimates that the benefits of cost
savings, product improvement, and elimination of inefficiencies have been ten to twenty times greater than
the investment in the program at some sites. It believes other sites experienced savings of fifty to one
hundred times the cost to implement the system.[2]

1 June Javelosa and Kristin Houser. "This Company Replaced 90% of Its Workforce with Machines. Here's What Happened." Futurism / World
Economic Forum. https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2017/02/after-replacing-90-of-employees-with-robots-this-companys-productivity-soared
2 Joseph H. Ness and Thomas G. Cucuzza. "Tapping the Full Potential of ABC." Harvard Business Review. July-Aug. 1995. https://hbr.org/1995/
07/tapping-the-full-potential-of-abc

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing  295

As you've learned, understanding the cost needed to manufacture a product is critical to making many
management decisions (Figure 6.2). Knowing the total and component costs of the product is necessary for
price setting and for measuring the efficiency and effectiveness of the organization. Remember that product
costs consist of direct materials, direct labor, and manufacturing overhead. It is relatively simple to understand
each product's direct material and direct labor cost, but it is more complicated to determine the overhead
component of each product's costs because there are a number of indirect and other costs to consider. A
company's manufacturing overhead costs are all costs other than direct material, direct labor, or selling and
administrative costs. Once a company has determined the overhead, it must establish how to allocate the cost.
This allocation can come in the form of the traditional overhead allocation method or activity-based costing..

Figure 6.2 Allocating Costs among Products. The total cost of a product is based on direct labor, direct
material, and factory overhead costs. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
license)

Component Categories under Traditional Allocation

Traditional allocation involves the allocation of factory overhead to products based on the volume of
production resources consumed, such as the amount of direct labor hours consumed, direct labor cost, or
machine hours used. In order to perform the traditional method, it is also important to understand each of the
involved cost components: direct materials, direct labor, and manufacturing overhead. Direct materials and
direct labor are cost categories that are relatively easy to trace to a product. Direct material comprises the
supplies used in manufacturing that can be traced directly to the product. Direct labor is the work used in
manufacturing that can be directly traced to the product. Although the processes for tracing the costs differ,
both job order costing and process costing trace the material and labor through materials requisition requests
and time cards or electronic mechanisms for measuring labor input. Job order costing traces the costs directly
296  Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing

to the product, and process costing traces the costs to the manufacturing department.

   ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

   Ethical Cost Modeling

   The proper use of management accounting skills to model financial and non-financial data optimizes the
   organization's evaluation and use of resources and assists in the proper evaluation of costs and
   revenues in an organization. The IFAC provides guidance on the use of cost models and how to ethically
   design proper cost models: "Cost models should be designed and maintained to reflect the cause-and-
   effect interrelationships and the behavioral dynamics of the way the organization functions. The
   information needs of decision makers at all levels of an organization should be taken into account, by
   incorporating an organization's business and operational models, strategy, structure, and competitive
   environment."[3]

Estimated Total Manufacturing Overhead Costs

The more challenging product component to track is manufacturing overhead. Overhead consists of indirect
materials, indirect labor, and other costs closely associated with the manufacturing process but not tied to a
specific product. Examples of other overhead costs include such items as depreciation on the factory
machinery and insurance on the factory building. Indirect material comprises the supplies used in production
that cannot be traced to an individual product, and indirect labor is the work done by employees not directly
involved in the manufacturing process, such as the supervisors' salaries or the maintenance staff's wages.
Because these costs cannot be traced directly to the product like direct costs are, they have to be allocated
among all of the products produced and added, or applied, to the production and product cost.
For example, the recipe for shea butter has easily identifiable quantities of shea nuts and other ingredients.
Based on the manufacturing process, it is also easy to determine the direct labor cost. But determining the
exact overhead costs is not easy, as the cost of electricity needed to dry, crush, and roast the nuts changes
depending on the moisture content of the nuts upon arrival.
Until now, you have learned to apply overhead to production based on a predetermined overhead rate
typically using an activity base. An activity base is considered to be a primary driver of overhead costs, and
traditionally, direct labor hours or machine hours were used for it. For example, a production facility that is
fairly labor intensive would likely determine that the more labor hours worked, the higher the overhead will
be. As a result, management would likely view labor hours as the activity base when applying overhead costs.
A predetermined overhead rate is calculated at the start of the accounting period by dividing the estimated
manufacturing overhead by the estimated activity base. The predetermined overhead rate is then applied to
production to facilitate determining a standard cost for a product. This estimated overhead rate will allow a
company to determine a cost for the product without having to wait, possibly several months, until all of the
actual overhead costs are determined, and to help with issues such as seasonal production or variable
overhead costs, such as utilities.

3 International Federation of Accountings (IFAC) PAIB Committee. "Evaluating and Improving Costing in Organizations." International Good
Practice Guidance. June 30, 2009. https://www.ifac.org/system/files/publications/files/IGPG-Evaluating-and-Improving-Costing-July-2009.pdf

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing                                                 297

Calculation of Predetermined Overhead and Total Cost under Traditional Allocation

The predetermined overhead rate is set at the beginning of the year and is calculated as the estimated
(budgeted) overhead costs for the year divided by the estimated (budgeted) level of activity for the year. This
activity base is often direct labor hours, direct labor costs, or machine hours. Once a company determines the
overhead rate, it determines the overhead rate per unit and adds the overhead per unit cost to the direct
material and direct labor costs for the product to find the total cost.

To put this method into context, consider this example. Musicality Manufacturing developed a recording
device similar to a microphone that allows musicians and music aficionados to record their playing or singing
along with any song publicly available. There are three products that vary in features and ability: Solo, Band,
and Orchestra. Musicality was started by musicians who majored in math and software engineering while in
college. Their main concern was building a quality manufacturing plant, so they used the simpler traditional
allocation method. They started by determining their direct costs, which are shown in Figure 6.3.

Figure 6.3 Material and Labor Costs for Musicality. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under
CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Musicality determines the overhead rate based on direct labor hours. At the beginning of the year, the
company estimates total overhead costs to be $2,500,000 and total direct labor hours to be 1,250,000. The
predetermined overhead rate is

                                            $2,500,000 overhead = $2.00 per labor hour
                                           1,250,000 labor hours

Musicality uses this information to determine the cost of each product. For example, the total direct labor
hours estimated for the solo product is 350,000 direct labor hours. With $2.00 of overhead per direct hour, the
Solo product is estimated to have $700,000 of overhead applied. When the $700,000 of overhead applied is
divided by the estimated production of 140,000 units of the Solo product, the estimated overhead per product
for the Solo product is $5.00 per unit. The computation of the overhead cost per unit for all of the products is
shown in Figure 6.4.

Figure 6.4 Musicality's Overhead per Unit Using Traditional Allocation. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

The overhead cost per unit from Figure 6.4 is combined with the direct material and direct labor costs as
298                                                                               Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing

shown in Figure 6.3 to compute the total cost per unit as shown in Figure 6.5.

Figure 6.5 Musicality's Product Costs Using Traditional Allocation. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

After reviewing the product cost and consulting with the marketing department, the sales prices were set. The
sales price, cost of each product, and resulting gross profit are shown in Figure 6.6.

Figure 6.6 Musicality's Gross Profit per Unit Using Traditional Allocation. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Sales of each product have been strong, and the total gross profit for each product is shown in Figure 6.7.
Using the Solo product as an example, 150,000 units are sold at a price of $20 per unit resulting in sales of
$3,000,000. The cost of goods sold consists of direct materials of $3.50 per unit, direct labor of $10 per unit,
and manufacturing overhead of $5.00 per unit. With 150,000 units, the direct material cost is $525,000; the
direct labor cost is $1,500,000; and the manufacturing overhead applied is $750,000 for a total Cost of Goods
Sold of $2,775,000. The resulting Gross Profit is $225,000 or $1.50 per unit.

Figure 6.7 Musicality's Gross Profit by Product Line Using Traditional Allocation. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing                                                  299

THINK IT THROUGH

Computing Actual Overhead Costs

As manufacturing technology becomes less expensive and more efficient, the mix between overhead and
labor changes so that tasks are more computerized tasks and involve less direct labor; the traditional use
of direct labor hours or direct labor dollars changes accordingly. If the predetermined overhead rate is
based on direct labor hours and set at the beginning of the year but manufacturing technology leads to
a reduction in direct labor during the year, the number of direct labor hours may be less than estimated.
This reduces the amount of overhead applied so that the overhead is more likely to be underapplied at
the end of the year. Why do companies not wait until the end of the period and compute an actual
overhead rate based on actual manufacturing costs and actual units?

 6.2 Describe and Identify Cost Drivers

As you've learned, the most common bases for predetermined overhead are direct labor hours, direct labor
dollars, or machine hours. Each of these costs is considered a cost driver because of the causal relationship
between the base and the related costs: As the cost driver's usage increases, the cost of overhead increases as
well. Table 6.1 shows various costs and potential cost drivers.

Common Manufacturing Expenses and Potential Cost Drivers

Common Expenses                                             Potential Cost Drivers

· Customer Service                                          · Number of product returns from customers
· Cleaning Equipment Costs                                  · Number of square feet
· Marketing Expenses                                        · Number of customer contacts
· Office Supplies                                           · Number of employees
· Green Floral Tape (indirect material)                     · Number of customer orders
· Website Maintenance Expense                               · Number of customer online orders

Table 6.1

The more accurately a company can determine the cost drivers for its products, the more accurate the costing
information will be, which in turn allows management to make better use of the cost data in making decisions.
As technology changes, however, the mix between materials, labor, and overhead changes. Often, improved
technology means less waste of material and fewer direct labor hours, but possibly more overhead. For
example, technology has changed the way pharmaceuticals are manufactured. Advancing technology allows
for the now smaller labor force to be more productive than a larger labor force from earlier years. While the
labor cost has changed, this decrease may only be temporary as a labor force with higher costs and different
skills is often needed. Additionally, an increase in technology often raises overhead costs. How accurate, then,
is the company's product cost information if it has become more efficient in its production process? Should
the company still be using a predetermined overhead application rate based on direct labor hours or machine
hours? A detailed analysis of the cost drivers will answer these questions.
300                                                                               Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing

Another benefit of looking at cost drivers is that doing so allows a company to analyze all costs. A company
can differentiate among costs that drive overhead and have value, those that do not drive overhead but still
add value, and those that may or may not drive the overhead but do not add any value. For example, a
furniture manufacturer produces and sells wooden tables in various colors. The painting process involves a
white base coat, a color coat, and a clear protective top coat. The three coats are applied in a sealed room
using a spraying process followed by an ultraviolet drying process. The depreciation on the spraying machines
and the ultraviolet bulbs used in the painting process are overhead costs. These costs drive or increase
overhead, and they add value to the product by increasing the quality. Costs associated with repainting or
fixing any blemishes are overhead costs that are necessary to sell the product but would not be considered
value-added costs. The goal is to eliminate as many of the non-value-added costs as possible and
subsequently reduce overhead costs.

Cost Drivers and Overhead

In today's production environment, there are many activities within the production process that can contribute
to the cost of the product, but determining the cost drivers may be complicated because some of those
activities may change over time. Additionally, the appropriate level of assigning cost drivers needs to be
determined. In some cases, overhead costs such as inspection increase with each unit inspected, and the costs
need to be allocated on a per-unit level. In other cases, the overhead costs, such as machine setup costs, are
incurred each time a batch of products is manufactured and need to be allocated at the batch level.

For example, the labor hours for the staff taking, fulfilling, and inspecting orders may increase as the number
of orders increases, driving up the overhead. Furthermore, the costs of taking orders or of quality inspections
can vary per product and may not be captured properly. Technology improvements, including switching to
automated processes for production, may decrease the labor hours of the production staff, driving the labor-
related overhead downward but potentially increasing other overhead expenses. These activities--order
taking, fulfillment, and quality inspections--are potential cost drivers associated with production, and they
each drive the overhead at varying rates.

   THINK IT THROUGH

   Identifying Cost Drivers

   Cost drivers vary widely among companies.

     1. After costs are accumulated into cost pools, what information would help management select the
          appropriate cost driver?

     2. Name an appropriate cost driver for each of the following cost pools:
           A. Plant cleaning and maintenance
           B. Factory supervision
           C. Machine maintenance
           D. Machine setups

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing                                                   301

Identify Cost Drivers

How does a company determine its cost drivers for indirect materials, indirect labor, and other overhead
costs? To begin the determination of appropriate cost drivers, an accountant analyzes the activities in the
product production process that contribute to the cost of that product. An activity is any action that consumes
company resources, such as taking orders for a product, setting up machines to produce the product,
inspecting the product, and providing customer support before and through the order process. For example,
Musicality's direct costs can be traced to the products, but there are indirect costs associated with using
various types of material for each product. While the Orchestra product has more intricate materials and labor,
it has fewer costs associated with requisitioning and conveying materials to the production line than the other
products have. Additionally, examining the inspection costs indicates the Orchestra product is a simple
product to inspect, so random quality inspections are sufficient. But individual inspections for both the Solo
and Band products are critical, and the overhead related to inspection costs should be based on the number of
inspections.

As you can imagine, the unique aspects of the production process for each product affect the overhead cost of
each product. However, these costs may not be allocated to the products appropriately when overhead is
applied using a predetermined rate based on one activity. While Solo, Band, and Orchestra might appear to be
different only in quality, they are actually very different from each other when it comes to manufacturing
overhead costs.

Whether the products produced require significantly different overhead resources or not, the company
benefits from understanding what its cost drivers are. The more efficiently each product's activities are
tracked, the more actual cost drivers are discovered, and the more accurately overhead can be assigned to
each product.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

Cost Drivers for Small Businesses

The value of analyzing cost drivers can be used in budgeting beyond allocating overhead to products.
American Express has forums designed to help small businesses be successful. Knowing the cost drivers
for your business can help with budgeting. American Express states that all business activities are related
to five main cost drivers:[4]

  · Employee head count is often the driver for office supply expense.
  · Salesperson head count is often the driver for auto and other employee travel expense.
  · The number of leads required to reach the target sales goal is often the driver for advertising, public

      relations, social media, search engine optimization expense, and other expenses associated with
      generating leads.
  · Sales and all related variable expenses are often the driver for commissions, bad debt, insurance
      expense, and so on.
  · Fixed costs, such as postage, web hosting fees, business licenses, and banking fees, are often
      overlooked as cost drivers.

4 American Express. "5 Cost Drivers to Help You Make Accurate Expense Projections." June 23, 2011. https://www.americanexpress.com/us/
small-business/openforum/articles/5-cost-drivers-to-help-you-make-accurate-expense-projections/
302  Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing

 6.3 Calculate Activity-Based Product Costs

As technology changes the ratio between direct labor and overhead, more overhead costs are linked to drivers
other than direct labor and machine hours. This shift in costs gives companies the opportunity to stop using
the traditional single predetermined overhead rate applied to all units of production and instead use an
overhead allocation approach based on the actual activities that drive overhead. Making this change allows
management to obtain more accurate product cost information, which leads to more informed decisions.
Activity-based costing (ABC) is the process that assigns overhead to products based on the various activities
that drive overhead costs.

Historical Perspective on Determination of Manufacturing Overhead Allocation

All products consist of material, labor, and overhead, and the major cost components have historically been
materials and labor. Manufacturing overhead was not a large cost of the product, so an overhead allocation
method based on labor or machine hours was logical. For example, as shown in Figure 6.3, Musicality
determined the direct costs and direct labor for their three products: Solo, Band, and Orchestra. Under the
traditional method of costing, the predetermined overhead rate of $2 per direct labor hour was computed by
dividing the estimated overhead by the estimated direct labor hours. Based on the number of direct labor
hours and the number of units produced for each product, the overhead per product is shown in Figure 6.4.

As technology costs decreased and production methods became more efficient, overhead costs changed and
became a much larger component of product costs. For many companies, and in many cases, overhead costs
are now significantly larger than labor costs. For example, in the last few years, many industries have
increased technology, and the amount of overhead has doubled.[5] Technology has changed the
manufacturing labor force, and therefore, the type and cost of labor associated with those jobs have changed.
In addition, technology has made it easier to track the various activities and their related overhead costs.

Costs can be gathered on a unit level, batch level, product level, or factory level. The idea behind these various
levels is that at each level, there are additional costs that are encountered, so a company must decide at which
level or levels it is best for the company to accumulate costs. A unit-level cost is incurred each time a unit of
product is produced and includes costs such as materials and labor. A batch-level cost is incurred every time
a batch of items is manufactured, for example, costs associated with purchasing and receiving materials. A
product-level cost is incurred each time a product is produced and includes costs such as engineering costs,
testing costs, or quality control costs. A factory-level cost is incurred because products are being produced
and includes costs such as the plant supervisor's salary and rent on the factory building. By definition, indirect
labor is not traced to individual products. However, it is possible to track some indirect labor to several jobs or
batches. A similar amount of information can be derived for indirect material. An example of an indirect
material in some manufacturing processes is cleaning solution. For example, one type of cleaning solution is
used in the manufacturing of pop sockets. It is not practical to measure every ounce of cleaning solution used
in the manufacture of an individual pop socket; rather, it makes sense to allocate to a particular batch of pop

5 Mary Ellen Biery. "A Sure-Fire Way to Boost the Bottom Line." Forbes. January 12, 2014. https://www.forbes.com/sites/sageworks/2014/01/
12/control-overhead-compare-industry-data/#47a9ea69d068

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing  303

sockets the cost of the cleaning solution needed to make that batch. Likewise, a manufacturer of frozen french
fries uses a different type of solution to clean potatoes prior to making the french fries and would allocate the
cost of the solution based on how much is used to make each batch of fries.
304                                                                               Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing

Establishing an Activity-Based Costing System

ABC is a five-stage process that allocates overhead more precisely than traditional allocation does by applying
it to the products that use those activities. ABC works best in complex processes where the expenses are not
driven by a single cost driver. Instead, several cost drivers are used as the overhead costs are analyzed and
grouped into activities, and each activity is allocated based on each group's cost driver. The five stages of the
ABC process are:

 1. Identify the activities performed in the organization
 2. Determine activity cost pools
 3. Calculate activity rates for each cost pool
 4. Allocate activity rates to products (or services)
 5. Calculate unit product costs

The first step is to identify activities needed for production. An activity is an action or process involved in the
production of inventory. There can be many activities that consume resources, and management will need to
narrow down the activities to those that have the biggest impact on overhead costs. Examples of these
activities include:

  · Taking orders
  · Setting up machines
  · Purchasing material
  · Assembling products
  · Inspecting products
  · Providing customer service

The second step is assigning overhead costs to the identified activities. In this step, overhead costs are
assigned to each of the activities to become a cost pool. A cost pool is a list of costs incurred when related
activities are performed. Table 6.2 illustrates the various cost pools along with their activities and related costs.

            Cost Pool  Cost Pools and Their Activities and Related Costs
Production
                                                            Activities and Related Costs
Purchasing material
Inspect products              · Indirect labor setting up machines
                              · Indirect labor cost of accepting and verifying orders
                              · Machine maintenance costs
                              · Costs to operate the machine: utilities, insurance, etc.

                              · Preparing purchase requisitions for the material
                              · Cost to move material from receiving department into production
                              · Depreciation of equipment used to move material

                              · Inspection supervisor costs
                              · Cost to move product to and from the inspection area

Table 6.2

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing                                   305

            Cost Pool     Cost Pools and Their Activities and Related Costs
Assemble products
                                                               Activities and Related Costs

                                 · Cost of assembly machine
                                 · Cost of label machine
                                 · Cost of labels

Technological production  · Website maintenance
                          · Depreciation of computers

Table 6.2

For example, the production cost pool consists of costs such as indirect labor for those accepting the order,
verifying the customer has credit to pay for the order, maintenance and depreciation on the machines used to
produce the orders, and utilities and rent for operating the machines. Figure 6.8 illustrates how the costs in
each pool are allocated to each product in a different proportion.

Figure 6.8 Allocating Overhead by Cost Pool. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-
NC-SA 4.0 license)

Once the costs are grouped into similar cost pools, the activities in each pool are analyzed to determine which
activity "drives" the costs in that pool, leading to the third step of ABC: identify the cost driver for each cost
pool and estimate an annual level of activity for each cost driver. As you've learned, the cost driver is the
306                                                                               Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing

specific activity that drives the costs in the cost pools. Table 6.3 shows some activities and cost drivers for
those activities.

                     Cost Pool  Activities and Their Common Cost Drivers
Customer order                                                                       Cost Driver
Production
Purchasing materials                            Number of orders
Assembling products                             Machine setups
Inspecting products                             Purchase requisitions
Customer service                                Direct labor hours
                                                Inspection hours
                                                Number of contacts with customer

Table 6.3

The fourth step is to compute the predetermined overhead rate for each of the cost drivers. This portion of the
process is similar to finding the traditional predetermined overhead rate, where the overhead rate is divided
by direct labor dollars, direct labor hours, or machine hours. Each cost driver will have its own overhead rate,
which is why ABC is a more accurate method of allocating overhead.

Finally, step five is to allocate the overhead costs to each product. The predetermined overhead rate found in
step four is applied to the actual level of the cost driver used by each product. As with the traditional overhead
allocation method, the actual overhead costs are accumulated in an account called manufacturing overhead
and then applied to each of the products in this step.

Notice that steps one through three represent the process of allocating overhead costs to activities, and steps
four and five represent the process of allocating the overhead costs that have been assigned to activities to
the products to which they pertain. Thus, the five steps of ABC involve two major processes: first, allocating
overhead costs to the various activities to get a cost per activity, and then allocating the cost per activity to
each product based on that product's usage of the activities.

Now that the steps involved have been detailed, let's demonstrate the calculations using the Musicality
example.

     YOUR TURN

     Comparing Estimates to Actual Costs

     A company has determined that its estimated 500,000 machine hours is the optimal driver for its
     estimated $1,000,000 machine overhead cost pool. The $750,000 in the material overhead cost pool
     should be allocated using the estimated 15,000 material requisition requests. How much is over- or
     underapplied if there were actually 490,000 machine hours and 15,500 material requisitions that resulted

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing                                                   307

in $950,000 in the machine overhead cost pool, and $780,000 in the material cost pool? What does this
difference indicate?

Solution

The predetermined overhead rate is $2 per machine hour ($1,000,000/500,000 machine hours) and $50
per material requisition ($750,000/15,000 requisitions). The actual and applied overhead can then be
calculated to determine whether it is over- or underapplied:

   The difference is a combination of factors. There were fewer machine hours than estimated, but there
   was also less overhead than estimated. There were more requisitions than estimated, and there was also
   more overhead.

The Calculation of Product Costs Using the Activity-Based Costing Allocation Method

Musicality is considering switching to an activity-based costing approach for determining overhead and has
collected data to help them decide which overhead allocation method they should use. Performing the
analysis requires these steps:

 1. Identify cost pools necessary to complete the product. Musicality determined its cost pools are:
          Setting up machines
          Purchasing material
          Inspecting products
          Assembling products
          Technological production

 2. Assign overhead cost to the cost pools. Musicality has estimated the overhead for each cost pool to be:

3. Identify the cost driver for each activity, and estimate an annual activity for each driver. Musicality
     determined the driver and estimated activity for each product to be the following:
308  Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing

 4. Compute the predetermined overhead for each cost driver. Musicality determined this predetermined
      overhead rate for each driver:

 5. Allocate overhead costs to products. Assuming Musicality's activities were as estimated, the amount
      allocated to each product is:

Now that Musicality has applied overhead to each product, they can calculate the cost per unit. Management
can review its sales price and make necessary decisions regarding its products. The overhead cost per unit is
the overhead for each product divided by the number of units of each product:

The overhead per unit can be added to the unit cost for direct material and direct labor to compute the total
product cost per unit:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing  309

The sales price was set after management reviewed the product cost with traditional allocation along with
other factors such as competition and product demand. The current sales price, cost of each product using
ABC, and the resulting gross profit are shown in Figure 6.9.

Figure 6.9 Solo's Sales Price, ABC Costing, and Gross Profit. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

The loss on each sale of the Solo product was not discovered until the company did the calculations for the
ABC method, because the sales of the other products were strong enough for the company to retain a total
gross profit.
Additionally, the more accurate gross profit for each product calculated using ABC is shown in Figure 6.10:

Figure 6.10 Solo's Gross Profit by Product. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-
NC-SA 4.0 license)

The calculations Musicality did in order to switch to ABC revealed that the Solo product was generating a loss
for every unit sold. Knowing this information will allow Musicality to consider whether they should make
changes to generate a profit from the Solo product, such as increase the selling price or carefully analyze the
costs to identify potential cost reductions. Musicality could also decide to continue selling Solo at a loss,
because the other products are generating enough profit for the company to absorb the Solo product loss and
still be profitable. Why would a company continue to sell a product that is generating a loss? Sometimes these
products are ones for which the company is well known or that draw customers into the store. For example,
companies will sometimes offer extreme sales, such as on Black Friday, to attract customers in the hope that
the customers will purchase other products. This information shows how valuable ABC can be in many
situations for providing a more accurate picture than traditional allocation.
310                                                                               Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing

The Service Industries and Their Use of the Activity-Based Costing Allocation Method

ABC costing was developed to help management understand manufacturing costs and how they can be better
managed. However, the service industry can apply the same principles to improve its cost management. Direct
material and direct labor costs range from nonexistent to minimal in the service industry, which makes the
overhead application even more important. The number and types of cost pools may be completely different
in the service industry as compared to the manufacturing industry. For example, the health-care industry may
have different overhead costs and cost drivers for the treatment of illnesses than they have for injuries. Some
of the overhead related to monitoring a patient's health status may overlap, but most of the overhead related
to diagnosis and treatment differ from each other.

     LINK TO LEARNING

     Activity-based costing is not restricted to manufacturing. Service industries also have cost drivers and
     can benefit from analyzing what drives their costs. See this report on activity-based costing at UPS
     (https://openstax.org/l/50ABC) for an example.

 6.4 Compare and Contrast Traditional and Activity-Based Costing Systems

Calculating an accurate manufacturing cost for each product is a vital piece of information for a company's
decision-making. For example, knowing the cost to produce a unit of product affects not only how a business
budgets to manufacture that product, but it is often the starting point in determining the sales price.

An important component in determining the total production costs of a product or job is the proper allocation
of overhead. For some companies, the often less-complicated traditional method does an excellent job of
allocating overhead. However, for many products, the allocation of overhead is a more complex issue, and an
activity-based costing (ABC) system is more appropriate.

Another factor to consider in determining which of the two major overhead allocation methods to use is the
cost associated with collecting and analyzing information. When making their decision regarding which
method to use, the company must consider these costs, both in time and money. Table 6.4 compares overhead
in the two systems. In many cases, the ABC method is more expensive in terms of time and other costs.

The difference between the traditional method (using one cost driver) and the ABC method (using multiple
cost drivers) is more complex than simply the number of cost drivers. When direct labor is a large portion of
the product cost, the overhead costs tend to be consistently driven by one cost driver, which is typically direct
labor or machine hours; the traditional method appropriately allocates those costs. When technology is a large
portion of the product cost, the overhead costs tend to be driven by multiple drivers, so using multiple cost
drivers in the ABC method allows for a more precise allocation of overhead.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing                                             311

               Overhead in Traditional versus ABC Costing

               Traditional                                  ABC

Overhead       Single cost driver                           Multiple cost drivers
assigned
Optimal usage  When direct labor is a large portion of the  When technology is a large portion of the
               product cost                                 product cost
Orientation
               Cost driven                                  Process driven

Table 6.4

As shown with Musicality's products, not only are there different costs for each product when comparing
traditional allocation with an activity-based costing, but ABC showed that the Solo product creates a loss for
the company. Activity-based costing is a more accurate method, because it assigns overhead based on the
activities that drive the overhead costs. It can be concluded, then, that the cost and subsequent gross loss for
each unit's sales provide a more accurate picture than the overall cost and gross profit under the traditional
method. image compares the cost per unit using the different cost systems and shows how different the costs
can be depending on the method used.

Advantages and Disadvantages of the Traditional Method of Calculating Overhead

The traditional allocation system assigns manufacturing overhead based on a single cost driver, such as direct
labor hours, direct labor dollars, or machine hours, and is optimal when there is a relationship between the
activity base and overhead. This most often occurs when direct labor is a large part of the product cost. The
theory supporting the single cost driver is that the cost driver selected increases as overhead increases, and
further analysis is more costly than it is valuable. Each method has its advantages and disadvantages. These
are advantages of the traditional method:

  · All manufacturing costs are classified as material, labor, or overhead and assigned to products regardless
      of whether they drive or are driven by production.

  · All manufacturing costs are considered to be part of the product cost, whereas nonmanufacturing costs
      are not considered to be production costs and are not assigned to products, regardless of whether the
      costs are based on the products. For example, the machines used to receive and process customer orders
      are necessary because product orders must be taken, but their costs are not allocated to particular
      products.

  · There is only one overhead cost pool and a single measure of activity, such as direct labor hours, which
      makes the traditional method simple and less costly to maintain. The predetermined overhead rate is
      based on estimated costs at the budgeted level of activity. Therefore, the overhead rate is consistent
      across products, but overhead may be over- or underapplied.

Disadvantages of the traditional method include:
312                                                                               Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing

· The use of the single cost driver does not allocate overhead as accurately as using multiple cost drivers.
· The use of the single cost driver may overallocate overhead to one product and underallocate overhead

   to another product, resulting in erroneous total costs and potentially setting an incorrect sales price.
· Traditional allocation assigns costs as period or product costs, and all product costs are included in the

   cost of inventory, which makes this method acceptable for generally accepted accounting principles
   (GAAP).

THINK IT THROUGH

ABC Method and Financial Statements

 There are pros and cons to both the traditional and the ABC system. One advantage of the ABC system is
 that it provides more accurate information on the costs to manufacture products, but it does not show
 up on the financial statements. Explain how this costing information has value if it does not appear on
 the financial statements.

Advantages and Disadvantages of Creating an Activity-Based Costing System for
Allocating Overhead

While ABC systems more accurately allocate the costs based on the various resources used to make the
product, they cost more to use and, therefore, are not always the best method. Management needs to
consider each system and how it will work within its own organization. Some advantages of activity-based
costing include:

  · There are multiple overhead cost pools, and each has its own unique measure of activity. This provides
      more accurate rates for applying overhead, but it takes more time to implement and results in a higher
      cost.

  · The allocation bases (i.e., measures of activity) often differ from those used in traditional allocation.
      Multiple cost pools allow management to group costs being influenced by similar drivers and to consider
      cost drivers beyond the typical labor or machine hour. This results in a more accurate overhead
      application rate.

  · The activity rates may consider the level of activity at capacity instead of the budgeted level of activity.
  · Both nonmanufacturing costs and manufacturing costs may be assigned to products. The main rationale

      in assigning costs is the relationship between the cost and the product. If the cost increases as the
      volume of the product increases, it is considered part of overhead.

There are disadvantages to using ABC costing that management needs to consider when determining which
method to use. Those disadvantages include:

  · Some manufacturing costs may be excluded from product costs. For example, the cost to heat the factory
      may be excluded as a product cost because, while it is necessary for production, it does not fit into one of
      the activity-driven cost pools.

  · It is more expensive, as there is a cost to collect and analyze cost driver information as well as to allocate
      overhead on the basis of multiple cost drivers.

  · An ABC system takes much more to implement and operate, as information on cost drivers must be

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing  313

      collected in an objective manner.
The advantages and disadvantages of both methods are as previously listed, but what is the practical impact
on the product cost? There are several items to consider at the product costs level:

  · Adopting an ABC overhead allocation system can allow a company to shift manufacturing overhead costs
      between products based on their volume.

  · Using an ABC method to better assign unit-level, batch-level, product-level, and factory-level costs can
      increase the per-unit costs of the low-volume products and decrease the per-unit costs of the high-
      volume products.

  · The effects are not symmetrical; there is usually a larger change in the per-unit costs of the low-volume
      products.

  · The cost of the products may include some period costs but not some of the product costs, so it is not
      considered GAAP compliant. The information is supplemental and very helpful to management, but the
      company still needs to compute the product's cost under the traditional method for financial reporting.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Changing from the traditional allocation method to ABC costing is not as simple as having management
   dictate that employees follow the new system. There are often challenges that begin with convincing
   employees that it will provide benefits and that they should buy into the new system. See this 1995
   article, Tapping the Full Potential of ABC, illustrating some of Chrysler's challenges
   (https://openstax.org/l/50Chrysler) to learn more.

 6.5 Compare and Contrast Variable and Absorption Costing

ABC costing assigns a proportion of overhead costs on the basis of the activities under the presumption that
the activities drive the overhead costs. As such, ABC costing converts the indirect costs into product costs.
There are also cost systems with a different approach. Instead of focusing on the overhead costs incurred by
the product unit, these methods focus on assigning the fixed overhead costs to inventory.

There are two major methods in manufacturing firms for valuing work in process and finished goods inventory
for financial accounting purposes: variable costing and absorption costing. Variable costing, also called direct
costing or marginal costing, is a method in which all variable costs (direct material, direct labor, and variable
overhead) are assigned to a product and fixed overhead costs are expensed in the period incurred. Under
variable costing, fixed overhead is not included in the value of inventory. In contrast, absorption costing, also
called full costing, is a method that applies all direct costs, fixed overhead, and variable manufacturing
overhead to the cost of the product. The value of inventory under absorption costing includes direct material,
direct labor, and all overhead.

The difference in the methods is that management will prefer one method over the other for internal decision-
making purposes. The other main difference is that only the absorption method is in accordance with GAAP.
314                                                                               Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing

Variable Costing Versus Absorption Costing Methods

The difference between the absorption and variable costing methods centers on the treatment of fixed
manufacturing overhead costs. Absorption costing "absorbs" all of the costs used in manufacturing and
includes fixed manufacturing overhead as product costs. Absorption costing is in accordance with GAAP,
because the product cost includes fixed overhead. Variable costing considers the variable overhead costs and
does not consider fixed overhead as part of a product's cost. It is not in accordance with GAAP, because fixed
overhead is treated as a period cost and is not included in the cost of the product.

   CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

   Absorbing Costs through Overproduction

   While companies use absorption costing for their financial statements, many also use variable costing for
   decision-making. The Big Three auto companies made decisions based on absorption costing, and the
   result was the manufacturing of more vehicles than the market demanded. Why? With absorption
   costing, the fixed overhead costs, such as marketing, were allocated to inventory, and the larger the
   inventory, the lower was the unit cost of that overhead. For example, if a fixed cost of $1,000 is allocated
   to 500 units, the cost is $2 per unit. But if there are 2,000 units, the per-unit cost is $0.50. While this was
   not the only reason for manufacturing too many cars, it kept the period costs hidden among the
   manufacturing costs. Using variable costing would have kept the costs separate and led to different
   decisions.

Deferred Costs

Absorption costing considers all fixed overhead as part of a product's cost and assigns it to the product. This
treatment means that as inventories increase and are possibly carried over from the year of production to
actual sales of the units in the next year, the company allocates a portion of the fixed manufacturing overhead
costs from the current period to future periods.

Carrying over inventories and overhead costs is reflected in the ending inventory balances at the end of the
production period, which become the beginning inventory balances at the start of the next period. It is
anticipated that the units that were carried over will be sold in the next period. If the units are not sold, the
costs will continue to be included in the costs of producing the units until they are sold. Finally, at the point of
sale, whenever it happens, these deferred production costs, such as fixed overhead, become part of the costs
of goods sold and flow through to the income statement in the period of the sale. This treatment is based on
the expense recognition principle, which is one of the cornerstones of accrual accounting and is why the
absorption method follows GAAP. The principle states that expenses should be recognized in the period in
which revenues are incurred. Including fixed overhead as a cost of the product ensures the fixed overhead is
expensed (as part of cost of goods sold) when the sale is reported.

For example, assume a new company has fixed overhead of $12,000 and manufactures 10,000 units. Direct
materials cost is $3 per unit, direct labor is $15 per unit, and the variable manufacturing overhead is $7 per
unit. Under absorption costing, the amount of fixed overhead in each unit is $1.20 ($12,000/10,000 units);
variable costing does not include any fixed overhead as part of the cost of the product. Figure 6.11 shows the

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing               315

cost to produce the 10,000 units using absorption and variable costing.

Figure 6.11 Finished Goods Inventory under Absorption and Variable Costing. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Assume each unit is sold for $33 each, so sales are $330,000 for the year. If the entire finished goods inventory
is sold, the income is the same for both the absorption and variable cost methods. The difference is that the
absorption cost method includes fixed overhead as part of the cost of goods sold, while the variable cost
method includes it as an administrative cost, as shown in Figure 6.12. When the entire inventory is sold, the
total fixed cost is expensed as the cost of goods sold under the absorption method or it is expensed as an
administrative cost under the variable method; net income is the same under both methods.

Figure 6.12 Income Statement When the Entire Inventory Is Sold. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Now assume that 8,000 units are sold and 2,000 are still in finished goods inventory at the end of the year. The
cost of the fixed overhead expensed on the income statement as cost of goods sold is $9,600 ($1.20/unit ×
8,000 units), and the fixed overhead cost remaining in finished goods inventory is $2,400 ($1.20/unit × 2,000
units). The amount of the fixed overhead paid by the company is not totally expensed, because the number of
units in ending inventory has increased. Eventually, the fixed overhead cost will be expensed when the
inventory is sold in the next period. Figure 6.13 shows the cost to produce the 8,000 units of inventory that
became cost of goods sold and the 2,000 units that remain in ending inventory.
316  Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing

Figure 6.13 Cost of Goods Sold and Ending Inventory with the Absorption and Variable Costing Methods.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

If the 8,000 units are sold for $33 each, the difference between absorption costing and variable costing is a
timing difference. Under absorption costing, the 2,000 units in ending inventory include the $1.20 per unit
share, or $2,400 of fixed cost. That cost will be expensed when the inventory is sold and accounts for the
difference in net income under absorption and variable costing, as shown in Figure 6.14.

Figure 6.14 Net Income under Absorption and Variable Costing When Ending Inventory Remains.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Under variable costing, the fixed overhead is not considered a product cost and would not be assigned to
ending inventory. The fixed overhead would have been expensed on the income statement as a period cost.

Inventory Differences

Because absorption costing defers costs, the ending inventory figure differs from that calculated using the
variable costing method. As shown in Figure 6.13, the inventory figure under absorption costing considers
both variable and fixed manufacturing costs, whereas under variable costing, it only includes the variable
manufacturing costs.

Suitability for Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis

Using the absorption costing method on the income statement does not easily provide data for cost-volume-
profit (CVP) computations. In the previous example, the fixed overhead cost per unit is $1.20 based on an
activity of 10,000 units. If the company estimated 12,000 units, the fixed overhead cost per unit would decrease
to $1 per unit. This calculation is possible, but it must be done multiple times each time the volume of activity

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing  317

changes in order to provide accurate data, as CVP analysis makes no distinction between variable costing and
absorption costing income statements.

   YOUR TURN

   Comparing Variable and Absorption Methods

   A company expects to manufacture 7,000 units. Its direct material costs are $10 per unit, direct labor is $9
   per unit, and variable overhead is $3 per unit. The fixed overhead is estimated at $49,000. How much
   would each unit cost under both the variable method and the absorption method?
   Solution
   The variable cost per unit is $22 (the total of direct material, direct labor, and variable overhead). The
   absorption cost per unit is the variable cost ($22) plus the per-unit cost of $7 ($49,000/7,000 units) for the
   fixed overhead, for a total of $29.

Advantages and Disadvantages of the Variable Costing Method

Variable costing only includes the product costs that vary with output, which typically include direct material,
direct labor, and variable manufacturing overhead. Fixed overhead is not considered a product cost under
variable costing. Fixed manufacturing overhead is still expensed on the income statement, but it is treated as a
period cost charged against revenue for each period. It does not include a portion of fixed overhead costs that
remains in inventory and is not expensed, as in absorption costing.

If absorption costing is the method acceptable for financial reporting under GAAP, why would management
prefer variable costing? Advocates of variable costing argue that the definition of fixed costs holds, and fixed
manufacturing overhead costs will be incurred regardless of whether anything is actually produced. They also
argue that fixed manufacturing overhead costs are true period expenses and have no future service potential,
since incurring them now has no effect on whether these costs will have to be incurred again in the future.

Advantages of the variable approach are:

  · More useful for CVP analysis. Variable costing statements provide data that are immediately useful for
      CVP analysis because fixed and variable overhead are separate items. Computations from financial
      statements prepared with absorption costing need computations to break out the fixed and variable costs
      from the product costs.

  · Income is not affected by changes in production volume. Fixed overhead is treated as a period cost
      and does not vary as the volume of inventory changes. This results in income increasing in proportion to
      sales, which may not happen under absorption costing. Under absorption costing, the fixed overhead
      assigned to a cost changes as the volume changes. Therefore, the reported net income changes with
      production, since fixed costs are spread across the changing number of units. This can distort the income
      picture and may even result in income moving in an opposite direction from sales.

  · Understandability. Managers may find it easier to understand variable costing reports because
      overhead changes with the cost driver.
318                                                                               Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing

  · Fixed costs are more visible. Variable costing emphasizes the impact fixed costs have on income. The
      total amount of fixed costs for the period is reported after gross profit. This emphasizes the direct impact
      fixed costs have on net income, whereas in absorption costing, fixed costs are included as product costs
      and thus are part of cost of goods sold, which is a determinant of gross profit.

  · Margins are less distorted. Gross margins are not distorted by the allocation of common fixed costs.
      This facilitates appraisal of the profitability of products, customers, and business segments. Common
      fixed costs, sometimes called allocated fixed costs, are costs of the organization that are shared by the
      various revenue-generating components of the business, such as divisions. Examples of these costs
      include the chief executive officer (CEO) salary and corporate headquarter costs, such as rent and
      insurance. These overhead costs are typically allocated to various components of the organization, such
      as divisions or production facilities. This is necessary, because these costs are needed for doing business
      but are generated by a part of the company that does not directly generate revenues to offset these
      costs. The company's revenues are generated by the goods that are produced and sold by the various
      divisions of the company.

  · Control is facilitated. Variable costing considers only variable production costs and facilitates the use of
      control mechanisms such as flexible budgets that are based on differing levels of production and
      therefore designed around variable costs, since fixed costs do not change within a relevant range of
      production.

  · Incremental analysis is more straightforward. Variable cost corresponds closely with the current out-
      of-pocket expenditure necessary to manufacture goods and can therefore be used more readily in
      incremental analysis.

While the variable cost method helps management make decisions, especially when the number of units in
ending inventory fluctuates, there are some disadvantages:

  · Financial reporting. The variable cost method is not acceptable for financial reporting under GAAP. GAAP
      requires expenses to be recognized in the same period as the related revenue, and the variable method
      expenses fixed overhead as a period cost regardless of how much inventory remains.

  · Tax reporting. Tax laws in the United States and many other countries do not allow variable costing and
      require absorption costing.

Advantages and Disadvantages of the Absorption Costing Method

Under the absorption costing method, all costs of production, whether fixed or variable, are considered
product costs. This means that absorption costing allocates a portion of fixed manufacturing overhead to each
product.

Advocates of absorption costing argue that fixed manufacturing overhead costs are essential to the
production process and are an actual cost of the product. They further argue that costs should be categorized
by function rather than by behavior, and these costs must be included as a product cost regardless of whether
the cost is fixed or variable.

The advantages of absorption costing include:

  · Product cost. Absorption costing includes fixed overhead as part of the inventory cost, and it is expensed
      as cost of goods sold when inventory is sold. This represents a more complete list of costs involved in
      producing a product.

  · Financial reporting. Absorption costing is the acceptable reporting method under GAAP.
  · Tax reporting. Absorption costing is the method required for tax preparation in the United States and

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing  319

      many other countries.
While financial and tax reporting are the main advantages of absorption costing, there is one distinct
disadvantage:

  · Difficulty in understanding. The absorption costing method does not list the incremental fixed overhead
      costs and is more difficult to understand and analyze as compared to variable costing.

   ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

   Cost Accounting for Ethical Business Managers

   An ethical and evenhanded approach to providing clear and informative financial information regarding
   costing is the goal of the ethical accountant. Ethical business managers understand the benefits of using
   the appropriate costing systems and methods. The accountant's entire business organization needs to
   understand that the costing system is created to provide efficiency in assisting in making business
   decisions. Determining the appropriate costing system and the type of information to be provided to
   management goes beyond providing just accounting information. The costing system should provide the
   organization's management with factual and true financial information regarding the organization's
   operations and the performance of the organization. Unethical business managers can game the costing
   system by unfairly or unscrupulously influencing the outcome of the costing system's reports.

Comparing the Operating Income Statements for Both Methods Assuming No Ending
Inventory in the First Year, and the Existence of Ending Inventory in the Second Year

In order to understand how to prepare income statements using both methods, consider a scenario in which a
company has no ending inventory in the first year but does have ending inventory in the second year. Outdoor
Nation, a manufacturer of residential, tabletop propane heaters, wants to determine whether absorption
costing or variable costing is better for internal decision-making. It manufactures 5,000 units annually and sells
them for $15 per unit. The total of direct material, direct labor, and variable overhead is $5 per unit with an
additional $1 in variable sales cost paid when the units are sold. Additionally, fixed overhead is $15,000 per
year, and fixed sales and administrative expenses are $21,000 per year.

Production is estimated to hold steady at 5,000 units per year, while sales estimates are projected to be 5,000
units in year 1; 4,000 units in year 2; and 6,000 in year 3.

Under absorption costing, the ending inventory costs include all manufacturing costs, including overhead. If
fixed overhead is $15,000 per year and 5,000 units are manufactured each year, the fixed overhead per unit is
$3:

                                                         $15,000 = $3 per unit
                                                       5,000 units

The projected income statement using absorption costing is shown in Figure 6.15:
320  Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing

Figure 6.15 Outdoor Nation's Income Statement Using Absorption Costing. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
In variable costing, the fixed overhead is not included in the cost of goods sold even if it relates to
manufacturing. As a result, the net income under variable costing differs from absorption costing by the same
amount as inventory differential. The projected income under variable costing is shown in Figure 6.16:

Figure 6.16 Outdoor Nation's Income Statement Using Variable Costing. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
The difference between the methods is attributable to the fixed overhead. Therefore, the methods can be
reconciled with each other, as shown in Figure 6.17.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing  321

Figure 6.17 Outdoor Nation's Reconciliation of Net Incomes. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Each method results in different amounts for net income when the inventory amounts change. More
specifically, the effects on income are:

  · Sales and Production equal. When a company sells the same quantity of products produced during the
      period, the resulting net income will be identical whether absorption costing or variable costing is used.
      When sales equals production, all manufacturing costs are accounted for in net income, and none of the
      costs are waiting in finished goods inventory to be recognized in a future period. Remember, with
      absorption costing, all manufacturing costs are added to the cost of the product during the work in
      process phase; thus, as the goods are sold, all costs have been accounted for. With variable costing, only
      the variable costs or production are added to the cost of the product during the work in process phase,
      and the fixed costs are expensed in the period in which they are incurred. Thus, in the example where
      sales and production are equal, all costs have been accounted for since all of the produced inventory has
      moved through cost of goods sold. This means that net income under absorption costing would be the
      same as net income under variable costing.

  · Sales less than Production. When a company produces more than it sells, net income will be less under
      variable costing than under absorption costing. In this scenario, there will be a buildup, or an increase, in
      inventory from the beginning of the period to the end of the period. Under variable costing, fixed
      manufacturing costs are still in the finished goods inventory account. But under absorption costing, those
      fixed costs have been expensed during the current production period and thus have reduced net income.

  · Sales greater than Production. When a company sells more than it produces during the current period,
      this indicates it is selling goods produced in a prior period. This will result in net income under variable
      costing being greater than under absorption costing. With absorption costing, all manufacturing costs are
      captured in the finished goods inventory account, and as those goods are sold, those costs become
      expenses. Selling items that were produced in a prior period defers the recognition of the costs of those
      products until the future period in which they are sold. Variable costing results in all of the variable costs
      associated with the sold products being in the current period net income, but only the current period
      fixed expenses would be included in the current period net income. The fixed expenses associated with
      the items produced in a prior period were recognized in the period in which they were incurred, not the
      period in which the products are sold. This results in fewer expenses and therefore greater income with
      the variable cost method.

  · Effect of differences in Sales and Production Long Term. The differences between net income
      generated under absorption costing and variable costing will be almost zero over the long run, as all costs
      associated with the production of goods will eventually be recognized in net income. The use of
      absorption versus variable costing creates more of a timing issue for the recognition of fixed expenses,
      and this is why net income would vary from period to period under the two methods but in the long run
      would not. In addition, absorption costing does allow for manipulation of income by managers through
322                                                                               Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing

       overproduction. Increasing production at year-end results in a higher net income than if the additional
       goods had not been produced, since increasing the number of units decreases the fixed cost per unit.
       Under absorption costing, these fixed costs follow the units produced and do not become a part of cost of
       goods sold until they are sold. Instead, a portion of the fixed costs is in the inventory accounts. Why would
       a manager want to manipulate income by overproducing? If the manager's annual bonus or other
       compensation is linked to net income, then the manager may be motivated to overproduce in order to
       increase the potential for or the amount of a bonus. If the level of sales remain constant while
       manipulating the production level, such an action would increase the company's expenses (including the
       amount of bonus) while not increasing its revenue. Barring any other justification for the increase in
       production, such an action by the manager would typically be considered an ethical violation, since the
       manager's actions would be in the manager's best interests, but contrary to the best interests of the
       company.

     LINK TO LEARNING

     Absorption costing is not as well understood as variable costing because of its financial statement
     limitations. But understanding how it can help management make decisions is very important. See the
     Strategic CFO forum on Absorption Cost Accounting that helps managers understand its uses
     (https://openstax.org/l/50Absorption) to learn more.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing  323

     Key Terms

absorption costing (also, full costing) system of accounting where all costs are treated as product costs
     regardless of whether they are variable or fixed

activity base activity that has been considered to be a primary driver of overhead costs and for which,
     traditionally, direct labor hours or machine hours were used

activity-based costing process of assigning overhead to products based on the cost driver for each activity
     cost pool

batch-level cost one that is incurred when a group (or batch) of items is produced
common fixed costs expenses that are shared among all divisions or production units and include such

     costs as the CEO salary and corporate headquarter costs
cost driver activity that is the reason for the increase or decrease of another cost; examples include labor

     hours incurred, labor costs paid, amounts of materials used in production, units produced, or any other
     activity that has a cause-and-effect relationship with incurred costs
cost pool accumulation of costs that are incurred during the production of the activities included in the
     activity cost pool
direct labor labor directly related to the manufacturing of the product or the production of a service
direct materials materials used in the manufacturing process that can be traced directly to the product
expense recognition principle (also, matching principle) matches expenses with associated revenues in the
     period in which the revenues were generated
factory-level cost one that is incurred when production occurs, such as production supervisor salary
indirect labor labor not directly involved in the active conversion of materials into finished products or the
     provision of services
indirect materials materials used in production but not efficiently traceable to a specific unit of production
manufacturing overhead costs all manufacturing costs excluding direct material and direct labor
product-level cost one that occurs as support of the product, such as engineering
traditional allocation allocation of factory overhead to products based on the volume of production
     resources consumed
unit-level cost one that is incurred for each unit produced
variable costing (also, direct costing or marginal costing) system of accounting where only variable costs are
     treated as product costs

     Summary

6.1 Calculate Predetermined Overhead and Total Cost under the Traditional Allocation Method
  · Manufacturing overhead is estimated for the upcoming period.
  · An activity base is selected to allocate overhead. This is traditionally direct labor hours, direct labor cost,
      or machine hours.
  · A predetermined overhead rate is calculated by dividing the estimated overhead by the allocation base.
  · Overhead is allocated to each product based on the estimated predetermined overhead rate and the
      number of units in the selected activity base.

6.2 Describe and Identify Cost Drivers
  · Overhead costs are analyzed and grouped based on similar activity bases. A cost driver, such as
      inspections, machine setups, or order taking, is selected for each cost grouping.
324                                                                               Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing

  · Analysis of cost drivers allows for better selection of true overhead cost drivers and more appropriate
      allocation of overhead.

6.3 Calculate Activity-Based Product Costs
  · Costs can be traced to the unit level or batch level.
  · There are five steps in the ABC process:
          identify activities needed for production
          assign overhead expenses
          assign a cost driver for each expense
          determine a predetermined overhead rate
          allocate overhead to each product

6.4 Compare and Contrast Traditional and Activity-Based Costing Systems
  · Traditional allocation assigns overhead based on a single overhead rate, while ABC assigns overhead
      based on several cost pools and the activities that drive costs.
  · Traditional allocation is optimal when the manufacturing process is labor driven and overhead increases
      based on traditional activity bases, such as direct labor hours, direct labor dollars, or machine hours.
  · ABC costing is optimal when the manufacturing process is technology driven and overhead increases
      based on various activities that differ for each product.

6.5 Compare and Contrast Variable and Absorption Costing
  · Absorption costing assigns all manufacturing costs to products, whereas variable costing only assigns
      variable costs to the products.
  · Income statements from both methods can be reconciled by starting with the net income or loss using
      variable costing and adding the amount of fixed costs included in ending inventory and subtracting the
      fixed costs included in beginning inventory.
  · Variable costing is not considered GAAP compliant but lends itself to cost-volume-profit analysis.

     Multiple Choice

1. 6.1 Active Frame, Inc., manufactures clear and tinted sport glasses. The manufacturing of clear glasses
takes 45,000 direct labor hours and involves 1,700 parts and 115 inspections. The manufacturing of tinted
glasses takes 115,000 direct labor hours and involves 1,400 parts and 450 inspections. The traditional method
applies $560,000 of overhead on the basis of direct labor hours. What is the amount of overhead per direct
labor hour applied to the clear glass products?

    A. $933.33
    B. $157,500
    C. $322.500
    D. $402,500

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing  325

2. 6.1 TyeDye Lights makes two products: Party and Holiday. It takes 80,900 direct labor hours to
manufacture the Party Line and 93,500 direct labor hours to manufacture the Holiday Line. Overhead consists
of $225,000 in the machine setup cost pool and $149,960 in the packaging cost pool. The machine setup pool
has 52,000 setups for the Party product and 98,000 setups for the Holiday product. The packaging cost pool
has 26,000 parts in the Party product and 39,200 parts for the Holiday product. Using the traditional cost
method of direct labor hours, what is the predetermined overhead rate?

    A. $1.50 per direct labor hour
    B. $2.15 per direct labor hour
    C. $2.30 per direct labor hour
    D. $3.80 per direct labor hour

3. 6.2 Which is not a step in analyzing the cost driver for manufacturing overhead?
    A. identify the cost
    B. identify non-value-added costs
    C. analyze the effect on manufacturing overhead
    D. identify the correlation between the potential driver and manufacturing overhead

4. 6.2 Overhead costs are assigned to each product based on ________.
    A. the proportion of that product's use of the cost driver
    B. a predetermined overhead rate for a single cost driver
    C. price of the product
    D. machine hours per product

5. 6.3 Which of the following is a reason a company would implement activity-based costing?
    A. The cost of record keeping is high.
    B. The additional data obtained through traditional allocation are not worth the cost.
    C. They want to improve the data on which decisions are made.
    D. A company only has one cost driver.

6. 6.3 Which is the correct formula for computing the overhead rate?
    A. estimated use of the cost driver for production/estimated overhead for the activity
    B. estimated overhead for the product/estimated use of the cost driver for the activity
    C. estimated use of the cost driver for production/estimated overhead for the activity
    D. estimated overhead for the activity/estimated use of the cost driver for the activity

7. 6.3 A company anticipates the cost to heat the building will be $21,000. Product A takes up 500 square
feet of space, while Product B takes up 200 square feet. The activity rate per product using activity-based
costing would be which of the following?

    A. $30/square foot
    B. $4.20/square foot
    C. $11/square foot
    D. $15.20/square foot

8. 6.3 A company calculated the predetermined overhead based on an estimated overhead of $70,000, and
the activity for the cost driver was estimated as 2,500 hours. If product A utilized 1,350 hours and product B
utilized 1,100 hours, what was the total amount of overhead assigned to the products?

    A. $35,000
    B. $30,800
    C. $37,800
    D. $68,600
326                                                                               Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing

9. 6.3 Which is not a step in activity-based costing?
    A. identify the activities performed by the organization
    B. identify the cost driver(s) associated with each activity
    C. compute a cost rate per production
    D. assign costs to products by multiplying the cost driver rate by the volume of the cost driver units
          consumed by the product

10.     6.3 What is the proper order of tasks in an ABC system?
    A.  identify the cost drivers, assign the costs to the products, calculate the overhead application rate for
    B.  each cost pool, identify the cost pools
    C.  assign the costs to the products, identify the cost drivers, calculate the overhead application rate for
    D.  each cost pool, identify the cost pools
        identify the cost drivers, identify the cost pools, calculate the overhead application rate for each cost
        pool, assign the costs to the products
        identify the cost pools, identify the cost drivers, calculate the overhead application rate for each cost
        pool, assign the costs to the products

11.     6.3 Which is not a task typically associated with ABC systems?
    A.  calculating the overhead application rate for each cost pool
    B.  applying a single cost rate
    C.  identifying a cost driver
    D.  more correctly allocating overhead costs

12.     6.4 Which statement is correct?
    A.  Activity-based cost systems are less costly than traditional cost systems.
    B.  Activity-based cost systems are easier to implement than traditional cost systems.
    C.  Activity-based cost systems are more accurate than traditional cost systems.
    D.  Activity-based cost systems provide the same data as traditional cost systems.

13.     6.4 Activity-based costing systems:
    A.  use a single predetermined overhead rate based on machine hours instead of on direct labor
    B.  frequently increase the overhead allocation to at least one product while decreasing the overhead
        allocation to at least one other product
    C.  limit the number of cost pools
    D.  always result in an increase of at least one product's selling price

14.     6.4 Activity-based costing is preferable in a system:
    A.  when multiple products have similar product volumes and costs
    B.  with a large direct labor cost as a percentage of the total product cost
    C.  with multiple, diverse products
    D.  where management needs to support an increase in sales price

15.     6.5 Absorption costing is also referred to as:
    A.  direct costing
    B.  marginal costing
    C.  full costing
    D.  variable costing

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing                                                327

16.     6.5 Under variable costing, a unit of product includes which costs?
    A.  direct material, direct labor, and manufacturing overhead
    B.  direct material, direct labor, and variable manufacturing overhead
    C.  direct material, direct labor, and fixed manufacturing overhead
    D.  direct material, direct labor, and all variable manufacturing overhead

17.     6.5 Under absorption costing, a unit of product includes which costs?
    A.  direct material, direct labor, and manufacturing overhead
    B.  direct material, direct labor, and variable manufacturing overhead
    C.  direct material, direct labor, and fixed manufacturing overhead
    D.  direct material, direct labor, and all variable manufacturing overhead

18.     6.5 A downside to absorption costing is:
    A.  not including fixed manufacturing overhead in the cost of the product
    B.  that it is not really useful for managerial decisions
    C.  that it is not allowable under GAAP
    D.  that it is not well designed for cost-volume-profit analysis

19.     6.5 When the number of units in ending inventory increases through the year, which of the following is
true?
        Net income is the same for variable and absorption costing.
    A.  Net income is higher for variable costing than for absorption costing.
    B.  Net income is higher for absorption costing than for variable costing.
    C.  There is no relationship between net income and the costing method.
    D.

20.     6.5 Product costs under variable costing are typically:
    A.  higher than under absorption costing
    B.  lower than under absorption costing
    C.  the same as with absorption costing
    D.  higher than absorption costing when inventory increases

     Questions

1. 6.1 What is the predetermined overhead rate, and when is it typically estimated?
2. 6.1 6.3 When is an activity-based costing system better than a traditional allocation system?
3. 6.2 What is the advantage of labeling activities as value added or nonvalue added?
4. 6.2 What conditions are necessary to designate an activity as a cost driver?
5. 6.2 For each cost pool, identify an appropriate cost driver.

    A. order department
    B. accounts receivable processing
    C. catering
    D. raw material inventory
6. 6.3 How is the primary focus of activity-based costing different from that of traditional allocation?
7. 6.3 What are the primary differences between traditional and activity-based costing?
328                                                                               Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing

8. 6.3 How are service companies similar or different from manufacturing companies in using ABC costing?
9. 6.3 How are costs allocated in an ABC system?
10. 6.4 In production, what has changed to allow ABC costing to become valuable?
11. 6.4 Why is it important to know the true cost for a product or service?
12. 6.5 What is the primary difference between variable costing and absorption costing?
13. 6.5 Why would managers prefer variable costing over absorption costing?
14. 6.5 Why is absorption costing the method allowable for GAAP?
15. 6.5 Can a company gather information for both variable and absorption costing systems?

        Exercise Set A

EA1. 6.1 Steeler Towel Company estimates its overhead to be $250,000. It expects to have 100,000 direct
labor hours costing $2,500,000 in labor and utilizing 12,500 machine hours. Calculate the predetermined
overhead rate using:

    A. Direct labor hours
    B. Direct labor dollars
    C. Machine hours

EA2. 6.1 Crystal Pools estimates overhead will utilize 250,000 machine hours and cost $750,000. It takes 2
machine hours per unit, direct material cost of $14 per unit, and direct labor of $20 per unit. What is the cost of
each unit produced?

EA3. 6.1 A company estimated 100,000 direct labor hours and $800,000 in overhead. The actual overhead
was $805,100, and there were 99,900 direct labor hours. What is the predetermined overhead rate, and how
much was applied during the year?

EA4. 6.1 Cozy, Inc., manufactures small and large blankets. It estimates $350,000 in overhead during the
manufacturing of 75,000 small blankets and 25,000 large blankets. What is the predetermined overhead rate if
a small blanket takes 1 machine hour and a large blanket takes 2 machine hours?

EA5.     6.2 Identify appropriate cost drivers for these cost pools:
    A.  setup cost pools
    B.  assembly cost pool
    C.  supervising cost pool
    D.  testing cost pool

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing                                                         329

EA6. 6.2 Match the activity with the most appropriate cost driver.

                                    Activity  Activities and Cost Drivers
Fringe benefits                                                                                       Cost Driver
Electricity
Depreciation                                                                   Square feet
Machine maintenance                                                            Direct labor hours
Heat and air conditioning                                                      Machine hours

Table 6.5

EA7. 6.3 Rex Industries has two products. They manufactured 12,539 units of product A and 8,254 units of
product B. The data are:

What is the activity rate for each cost pool?
EA8. 6.3 Rex Industries has identified three different activities as cost drivers: machine setups, machine
hours, and inspections. The overhead and estimated usage are:

Compute the overhead rate for each activity.
EA9. 6.3 Custom's makes two types of hats: polyester (poly) and silk. There are two cost pools: setup, with
an estimated $100,000 in overhead, and inspection, with $25,000 in overhead. Poly is estimated to have 750,000
setups and 170,000 inspections, while silk has 250,000 setups and 80,000 inspections. How much overhead is
applied to each product?
EA10. 6.3 Custom's has three cost pools and an associated cost driver to allocate the costs to the product.
The cost pools, cost driver, estimated overhead, and estimated activity for the cost pool are:

What is the predetermined overhead rate for each activity?
330                                                       Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing

EA11. 6.3 Potterii sells its products to large box stores and recently added a retail line of products to sell
directly to consumers. These estimates are to be used in determining the overhead allocation rate for ABC:

What would be the predetermined rate for each cost pool?

EA12.     6.3 Assign each of the following expenses to either the machine setup cost pool or the factory cost
pool:
        indirect materials
    A.  inspections
    B.  factory insurance
    C.  machine depreciation
    D.  machine setup (indirect labor)
    E.  machine setup (indirect material)
    F.

EA13. 6.4 Tri-bikes manufactures two different levels of bicycles: the Standard and the Extreme. The total
overhead of $300,000 has traditionally been allocated by direct labor hours, with 150,000 hours for the
Standard and 50,000 hours for the Extreme. After analyzing and assigning costs to two cost pools, it was
determined that machine hours is estimated to have $200,000 of overhead, with 4,000 hours used on the
Standard product and 1,000 hours used on the Extreme product. It was also estimated that the setup cost pool
would have $100,000 of overhead, with 1,000 hours for the Standard and 1,500 hours for the Extreme. What is
the overhead rate per product, under traditional and under ABC costing?

EA14. 6.5 Cool Pool has these costs associated with production of 20,000 units of accessory products: direct
materials, $70; direct labor, $110; variable manufacturing overhead, $45; total fixed manufacturing overhead,
$800,000. What is the cost per unit under both the variable and absorption methods?

EA15. 6.5 Using this information from Planters, Inc., what is the cost per unit under both variable and
absorption costing?

  B Exercise Set B

EB1. 6.1 Green Bay Cheese Company estimates its overhead to be $375,000. It expects to have 125,000
direct labor hours costing $1,500,000 in labor and utilizing 15,000 machine hours. Calculate the predetermined
overhead rate using:

    A. Direct labor hours
    B. Direct labor dollars
    C. Machine hours

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing                                                331

EB2. 6.1 Boarders estimates overhead will utilize 160,000 machine hours and cost $80,000. It takes 4
machine hours per unit, direct material cost of $5 per unit, and direct labor of $5 per unit. What is the cost of
each unit produced?

EB3. 6.1 A company estimated 50,000 direct labor hours and $450,000 in overhead. The actual overhead
was $445,000, and there were 50,500 direct labor hours. What is the predetermined overhead rate, and how
much was applied during the year?

EB4. 6.1 Cozy, Inc., manufactures small and large blankets. It estimates $950,000 in overhead during the
manufacturing of 360,000 small blankets and 120,000 large blankets. What is the predetermined overhead rate
if a small blanket takes 2 hours of direct labor and a large blanket takes 3 hours of direct labor?

EB5.     6.2 Identify appropriate cost drivers for these cost pools:
    A.  material cost pool
    B.  machine cost pool
    C.  painting cost pool
    D.  maintenance cost pool

EB6. 6.2 Match the activity with the most appropriate cost driver.

                              Activity  Activities and Cost Drivers
Factory maintenance                                                                      Cost Driver
Payroll tax
Rent                                                        Number of setups
Machine setups                                              Number of employees
Factory supervision                                         Square feet
                                                            Direct labor hours

Table 6.6

EB7. 6.3 Rocks Industries has two products. They manufactured 12,539 units of product A and 8,254 units of
product B. The data are:

What is the activity rate for each cost pool?
332                                                                               Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing

EB8. 6.3 Rocks Industries has identified three different activities as cost drivers: machine setups, machine
hours, and inspections. The overhead and estimated usage are:

Compute the overhead rate for each activity.

EB9. 6.3 Frenchy's makes two types of scarves: polyester (poly) and silk. There are two cost pools: setup,
with an estimated $120,000 in overhead, and inspection, with $30,000 in overhead. Poly is estimated to have
800,000 setups and 450,000 inspections, while silk has 400,000 setups and 150,000 inspections. How much
overhead is applied to each product?

EB10. 6.3 Frenchy's has three cost pools and an associated cost driver to allocate the costs to the product.
The cost pools, cost driver, estimated overhead, and estimated activity for the cost pool are:

What is the predetermined overhead rate for each activity?

EB11. 6.3 Carboni recently added a carbon line in addition to its aluminum line. The following are estimates
to be used in determining the overhead allocation rate for ABC.

What would be the predetermined rate for each cost pool?

EB12.     6.3 Assign each of the following expenses to either the machine cost pool or the factory cost pool:
    A.  property taxes
    B.  heat and air-conditioning
    C.  electricity, machines
    D.  plant depreciation
    E.  electricity, plant
    F.  machine maintenance wages

EB13. 6.4 Stacks manufactures two different levels of hockey sticks: the Standard and the Slap Shot. The
total overhead of $600,000 has traditionally been allocated by direct labor hours, with 400,000 hours for the
Standard and 200,000 hours for the Slap Shot. After analyzing and assigning costs to two cost pools, it was
determined that machine hours is estimated to have $450,000 of overhead, with 30,000 hours used on the
Standard product and 15,000 hours used on the Slap Shot product. It was also estimated that the inspection
cost pool would have $150,000 of overhead, with 25,000 hours for the Standard and 5,000 hours for the Slap
Shot. What is the overhead rate per product, under traditional and under ABC costing?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing                                                 333

EB14. 6.5 Crafts 4 All has these costs associated with production of 12,000 units of accessory products:
direct materials, $19; direct labor, $30; variable manufacturing overhead, $15; total fixed manufacturing
overhead, $450,000. What is the cost per unit under both the variable and absorption methods?

EB15. 6.5 Using this information from Outdoor Grills, what is the cost per unit under both variable and
absorption costing?

     Problem Set A

PA1. 6.1 Colonels uses a traditional cost system and estimates next year's overhead will be $480,000, with
the estimated cost driver of 240,000 direct labor hours. It manufactures three products and estimates these
costs:

If the labor rate is $25 per hour, what is the per-unit cost of each product?
PA2. 6.1 Five Card Draw manufactures and sells 24,000 units of Diamonds, which retails for $180, and
27,000 units of Clubs, which retails for $190. The direct materials cost is $25 per unit of Diamonds and $30 per
unit of Clubs. The labor rate is $25 per hour, and Five Card Draw estimated 180,000 direct labor hours. It takes
3 direct labor hours to manufacture Diamonds and 4 hours for Clubs. The total estimated overhead is
$720,000. Five Card Draw uses the traditional allocation method based on direct labor hours.

    A. What is the gross profit per unit for Diamonds and Clubs?
    B. What is the total gross profit for the year?
334                                                                               Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing

PA3. 6.2 A local picnic table manufacturer has budgeted these overhead costs:

They are considering adapting ABC costing and have estimated the cost drivers for each pool as shown:

Recent success has yielded an order for 1,000 tables. Assume direct labor costs per hour of $20. Determine
how much the job would cost given the following activities:

PA4. 6.2 Explain how each activity in this list can be associated with the corresponding unit or batch level
provided.

    A. Assembling products: unit level
    B. Issuing raw materials: batch level
    C. Machine setup: batch level
    D. Inspection: unit level
    E. Loading the labeling machine: batch level
    F. Equipment maintenance: batch level
    G. Printing a banner: unit level
    H. Moving material: batch level
    I. Ordering a part: batch level

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing  335

PA5. 6.3 Medical Tape makes two products: Generic and Label. It estimates it will produce 423,694 units of
Generic and 652,200 of Label, and the overhead for each of its cost pools is as follows:

It has also estimated the activities for each cost driver as follows:

How much is the overhead allocated to each unit of Generic and Label?
PA6. 6.3 Box Springs, Inc., makes two sizes of box springs: twin and double. The direct material for the twin
is $25 per unit and $40 is used in direct labor, while the direct material for the double is $40 per unit, and the
labor cost is $50 per unit. Box Springs estimates it will make 5,000 twins and 9,000 doubles in the next year. It
estimates the overhead for each cost pool and cost driver activities as follows:

How much does each unit cost to manufacture?
PA7. 6.3 Please use the information from this problem for these calculations. After grouping cost pools and
estimating overhead and activities, Box Springs determined these rates:

It estimates there will be five orders in the next year, and those jobs will involve:

What is the total cost of the jobs?
336  Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing

PA8. 6.4 A company has traditionally allocated its overhead based on machine hours but had collected this
information to change to activity-based costing:

    A. How much overhead would be allocated to each unit under the traditional allocation method?
    B. How much overhead would be allocated to each unit under activity-based costing?
PA9. 6.4 Carlton's Kitchens makes two types of pasta makers: Strands and Shapes. The company expects to
manufacture 70,000 units of Strands, which has a per-unit direct material cost of $10 and a per-unit direct
labor cost of $60. It also expects to manufacture 30,000 units of Shapes, which has a per-unit material cost of
$15 and a per-unit direct labor cost of $40. It is estimated that Strands will use 140,000 machine hours and
Shapes will require 60,000 machine hours. Historically, the company has used the traditional allocation method
and applied overhead at a rate of $21 per machine hour. It was determined that there were three cost pools,
and the overhead for each cost pool is shown:

The cost driver for each cost pool and its expected activity is shown:

    A. What is the per-unit cost for each product under the traditional allocation method?
    B. What is the per-unit cost for each product under ABC costing?
PA10. 6.4 Carlton's Kitchen's three cost pools and overhead estimates are as follows:

Compare the overhead allocation using:
    A. The traditional allocation method
    B. The activity-based costing method

(Hint: the traditional method uses machine hours as the allocation base.)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing                                           337

PA11. 6.4 Lampierre makes brass and gold frames. The company computed this information to decide
whether to switch from the traditional allocation method to ABC:

The estimated overhead for the material cost pool is estimated as $12,500, and the estimate for the machine
setup pool is $35,000. Calculate the allocation rate per unit of brass and per unit of gold using:

    A. The traditional allocation method
    B. The activity-based costing method

PA12. 6.4 Portable Seats makes two chairs: folding and wooden. This information was obtained to review
the decision to consider ABC:

Compute the overhead assigned to each product under:
    A. The traditional allocation method
    B. The activity-based costing method

PA13. 6.5 Grainger Company produces only one product and sells that product for $100 per unit. Cost
information for the product is:

Direct Material                                             $15 per Unit
Direct Labor                                                $25 per Unit
Variable Overhead                                           $5 per Unit
Fixed Overhead                                              $34,000

Selling expenses are $4 per unit and are all variable. Administrative expenses of $20,000 are all fixed. Grainger
produced 5,000 units; sold 4,000; and had no beginning inventory.

    A. Compute net income under
                 i. absorption costing
                ii. variable costing

    B. Reconcile the difference between the income under absorption and variable costing.
338  Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing

PA14. 6.5 Summarized data for Walrus Co. for its first year of operations are:

    A. Prepare an income statement under absorption costing
    B. Prepare an income statement under variable costing
PA15. 6.5 Happy Trails has this information for its manufacturing:

Its income statement under absorption costing is:

Prepare an income statement with variable costing and a reconciliation statement between both methods.
PA16. 6.5 Appliance Apps has the following costs associated with its production and sale of devices that
allow appliances to receive commands from cell phones.

Prepare an income statement under both the absorption and variable costing methods along with a
reconciliation between the two statements.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing                                        339

PA17. 6.5 This information was collected for the first year of manufacturing for Appliance Apps:

Prepare an income statement under variable costing, and prepare a reconciliation to the income under the
absorption method.

  B Problem Set B

PB1. 6.1 Bobcat uses a traditional cost system and estimates next year's overhead will be $800,000, as
driven by the estimated 25,000 direct labor hours. It manufactures three products and estimates the following
costs:

If the labor rate is $30 per hour, what is the per-unit cost of each product?
PB2. 6.1 Five Card Draw manufactures and sells 10,000 units of Aces, which retails for $200, and 8,000 units
of Kings, which retails for $170. The direct materials cost is $20 per unit of Aces and $15 per unit of Kings. The
labor rate is $30 per hour, and Five Card Draw estimated 64,000 direct labor hours. It takes 4 direct labor hours
to manufacture Aces and 3 hours for Kings. The total estimated overhead is $128,000. Five Card Draw uses the
traditional allocation method based on direct labor hours.

    A. How much is the gross profit per unit for Aces and Kings?
    B. What is the total gross profit for the year?
340                                                                               Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing

PB3. 6.2 A local picnic table manufacturer has budgeted the following overhead costs:

They are considering adapting ABC costing and have estimated the cost drivers for each pool as shown:

Recent success has yielded an order for 1,500 tables. Determine how much the job would cost given the
following activities, and assuming an hourly rate for direct labor of $25 per hour:

PB4. 6.2 Explain how each activity in this list can be associated with the corresponding unit or batch level
provided.

    A. Assembling products: batch level
    B. Issuing raw materials: unit level
    C. Machine setup: unit level
    D. Inspection: batch level
    E. Loading the labeling machine: unit level
    F. Equipment maintenance: unit level
    G. Printing a banner: batch level
    H. Moving material: unit level
    I. Ordering a part: unit level

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing                                             341

PB5. 6.3 Wrappers Tape makes two products: Simple and Removable. It estimates it will produce 369,991
units of Simple and 146,100 of Removable, and the overhead for each of its cost pools is as follows:

It has also estimated the activities for each cost driver as follows:

How much is the overhead allocated to each unit of Simple and Removable?
PB6. 6.3 Box Springs, Inc., makes two sizes of box springs: queen and king. The direct material for the
queen is $35 per unit and $55 is used in direct labor, while the direct material for the king is $55 per unit, and
the labor cost is $70 per unit. Box Springs estimates it will make 4,300 queens and 3,000 kings in the next year.
It estimates the overhead for each cost pool and cost driver activities as follows:

How much does each unit cost to manufacture?
PB7. 6.3 Please use the information from this problem for these calculations. After grouping cost pools and
estimating overhead and activities, Box Springs determined these rates:

Box Springs estimates there will be four orders in the next year, and those jobs will involve:

What is the total cost of the jobs?
342  Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing

PB8. 6.4 A company has traditionally allocated its overhead based on machine hours but collected this
information to change to activity-based costing:

    A. How much overhead would be assigned to each unit under the traditional allocation method?
    B. How much overhead would be assigned to each unit under activity-based costing?
PB9. 6.4 Casey's Kitchens makes two types of food smokers: Gas and Electric. The company expects to
manufacture 20,000 units of Gas smokers, which have a per-unit direct material cost of $15 and a per-unit
direct labor cost of $25. It also expects to manufacture 50,000 units of Electric smokers, which have a per-unit
material cost of $20 and a per-unit direct labor cost of $45. Historically, it has used the traditional allocation
method and applied overhead at a rate of $125 per machine hour. It was determined that there were three
cost pools, and the overhead for each cost pool is as follows:

The cost driver for each cost pool and its expected activity is as follows:

    A. What is the per-unit cost for each product under the traditional allocation method?
    B. What is the per-unit cost for each product under ABC costing?
    C. Compared to ABC costing, was each product's overhead under- or overapplied?
    D. How much was overhead under- or overapplied for each product?
PB10. 6.4 Casey's Kitchens' three cost pools and overhead estimates are as follows:

Compare the overhead allocation using:
    A. The traditional allocation method
    B. The activity-based costing method

(Hint: the traditional method uses machine hours as the allocation base.)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing                                                343

PB11. 6.4 Lampierre makes silver and gold candlesticks. The company computed this information to decide
whether to switch from the traditional allocation method to ABC.

The estimated overhead for the material cost pool is estimated as $45,000, and the estimate for the machine
setup pool is $55,000. Calculate the allocation rate per unit of silver and per unit of gold using:

    A. The traditional allocation method
    B. The activity-based costing method

PB12. 6.4 Portable Seats makes two chairs: folding and wooden. This information was obtained to review
the decision to consider ABC:

Compute the overhead assigned to each product under:
    A. The traditional allocation method
    B. The activity-based costing method

PB13. 6.5 Submarine Company produces only one product and sells that product for $150 per unit. Cost
information for the product is as follows:

Selling expenses are $2 per unit and are all variable. Administrative expenses of $15,000 are all fixed,
Submarine produced 2,000 units and sold 1,800. Grainger had no beginning inventory.

    A. Compute net income under
                 i. absorption costing
                ii. variable costing

    B. Reconcile the difference between the income under absorption and variable costing.
344                                                                               Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing

PB14. 6.5 Summarized data for Backdraft Co. for its first year of operations are as follows:

    A. Prepare an income statement under absorption costing
    B. Prepare an income statement under variable costing
PB15. 6.5 Trail Outfitters has this information for its manufacturing:

Its income statement under absorption costing is as follows:

Prepare an income statement with variable costing and a reconciliation statement between both methods.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing                                                345

PB16. 6.5 Wifi Apps has these costs associated with its production and sale of devices that allow visual
communications between cell phones:

Prepare an income statement under both the absorption and variable costing methods along with a
reconciliation between the two statements.
PB17. 6.5 This information was collected for the first year of manufacturing for Wifi Apps:

Prepare an income statement under variable costing and prepare a reconciliation to the income under the
absorption method.

     Thought Provokers

TP1. 6.1 What conditions are optimal for using traditional allocation? Is the allocation more effective when
there is high-volume production?
TP2. 6.2 College Cases sells cases for electronic devices such as phones, computers, and tablets. These
cases have college logos or mascots on them and can be customized by adding such things as the customer's
name, initials, sport, or fraternity letters. The company buys the cases in various colors and then uses laser
technology to do the customization of the letters and to add school names, logos, mascots, and so on. What
are potential activity-based costing pools for College Cases, and what would be appropriate cost drivers?
TP3. 6.3 How would a service industry apply activity-based costing?
TP4. 6.4 Cape Cod Adventures makes foam noodles with sales of 3,000,000 units per year and retractable
boat oars with sales of 50,000 pairs per year. What information would Cape Cod Adventures need in order to
change from traditional to ABC costing? What are the limitations to activity-based costing?
TP5. 6.5 In designing a bonus structure to reward your production managers, one of the options is to
reward the managers based on reaching annual income targets. What are the differences between a reward
system for a company that uses absorption costing and one for a company that uses variable costing?
346                                                                               Chapter 6 Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
     7

              Budgeting

Figure 7.1 Budget. Chris and Nikki needed to budget effectively in order to take advantage of sightseeing
opportunities while studying abroad. (credit: modification of "Tourists: Here or there?" by "morebyless"/Flickr,
CC BY 2.0)

 Chapter Outline

  7.1 Describe How and Why Managers Use Budgets
  7.2 Prepare Operating Budgets
  7.3 Prepare Financial Budgets
  7.4 Prepare Flexible Budgets
  7.5 Explain How Budgets Are Used to Evaluate Goals

      Why It Matters

   Chris and Nikki are studying abroad next semester. Chris wants to spend her weekends sightseeing, but she
   does not have a lot of extra money. She creates a budget so she can save money to sightsee. She can reliably
   predict costs such as tuition, books, travel, and much of the sightseeing costs. She can also predict the amount
   of resources she will have to meet those costs, including scholarships, some savings, and earnings from her
   job.
   Chris developed a budget from this information and planned for emergencies by including extra working
   hours and listing expenses that could be eliminated. On her trip, Chris was very careful with expenses and
   visited all the places she budgeted to visit.
   Chris's roommate, Nikki, on the other hand, did not plan ahead before going abroad. She did not have any
   travel funds for the last several weeks and lamented that she should not have purchased so many souvenirs.
   Chris and Nikki are clear illustrations of why people and companies prepare budgets. Preparing a budget for
348                                                                               Chapter 7 Budgeting

future anticipated activities requires a company to look critically at its revenue and expenses. A good budget
gives management the ability to evaluate results at the end of the budget cycle. Even well-planned budgets
can have emergencies or unplanned financial disruptions, but having a budget provides a company with the
information to develop an alternative budget. A good budget can be adjusted to work with changes in income
and still produce similar results.

In this chapter, you will learn the basic process companies use to create budgets and the general composition
of basic budgets that are summed up in a master budget. You will also learn the importance of the flexible
budget and be introduced to the idea of how budgets are used to evaluate company and management
performance.

 7.1 Describe How and Why Managers Use Budgets

Implementation of a company's strategic plan often begins by determining management's basic expectations
about future economic, competitive, and technological conditions, and their effects on anticipated goals, both
long-term and short-term. Many firms at this stage conduct a situational analysis that involves examining their
strengths and weaknesses and the external opportunities available and the threats that they might face from
competitors. This common analysis is often labeled as SWOT.

After performing the situational analysis, the organization identifies potential strategies that could enable
achievement of its goals. Finally, the company will create, initiate, and monitor both long-term and short-term
plans.

An important step in the initiation of the company's strategic plan is the creation of a budget. A good
budgeting system will help a company reach its strategic goals by allowing management to plan and to control
major categories of activity, such as revenue, expenses, and financing options. As detailed in Accounting as a
Tool for Managers, planning involves developing future objectives, whereas controlling involves monitoring
the planning objectives that have been put into place.

There are many advantages to budgeting, including:

  · Communication
          Budgeting is a formal method to communicate a company's plans to its internal stakeholders, such
             as executives, department managers, and others who have an interest in--or responsibility
             for--monitoring the company's performance.
          Budgeting requires managers to plan for both revenues and expenses.

  · Planning
          Preparing a budget requires managers to consider and evaluate
                 The assumptions used to prepare the budget.
                 Long-term financial goals.
                 Short-term financial goals.
                 The company's position in the market.
                 How each department supports the strategic plan.

          Preparing a budget requires departments to work together to
                 Determine realizable sales goals.
                 Compute the manufacturing or other requirements necessary to meet the sales goals.
                 Solve bottlenecks that are predicted by the budget.
                 Allocate resources so they can be used effectively to meet the sales and manufacturing goals.
                 Compare forecasted or flexible budgets with actual results.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 7 Budgeting  349

  · Evaluation
          When compared to actual results, budgets are early alerts and they forecast:
                 Cash flows for various levels of production.
                 When loans may be required or when loans may be reduced.

          Budgets show which areas, departments, units, and so forth, are profitable or meet their appropriate
             goals. Similarly, they also show which components are unprofitable or do not reach their anticipated
             goals.

          Budgets set defined benchmarks that may be used for evaluating company and management
             performance, including raises and bonuses, as well as negative consequences, such as firing.

To understand the benefits of budgeting, consider Big Bad Bikes, a company that manufactures high-end
mountain bikes. The company will begin producing and selling trainers this year. Trainers are stands that allow
a rider to ride their bike indoors similar to the way bikes are used in spinning classes. Big Bad Bikes has a
5-year plan and has always been successful in managing its budget. Managers participate in developing the
budget and are aware that all expenses must be related to the company's strategic plan. They know that
managing their departments is much easier when the budget is developed to support the strategic plan.

The plan for Big Bad Bikes is to introduce itself to the trainer market with a sales price of $70 for the first two
quarters of the year and then raise the price to $75 per unit. The marketing department estimates that sales
will be 1,000 units for the first two quarters, 1,500 for the third quarter, and 2,500 per quarter through the
second year. Management will work with each department to communicate goals and build a budget based on
the sales plan. The resulting budget can be evaluated by all departments involved.

   ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

   Break-Even Analysis and Profitability

   In the long run, proper budget reporting assists management in making good decisions. Management
   uses budgets to evaluate the performance of employees and their department. They can also use
   budgets to evaluate and benchmark the performance of a business unit in a large business organization
   or of the entire performance of a small company. They can also use budgets to evaluate separate
   projects. In budgeting situations, employees may feel a tension between reporting actual results and
   reporting results that reach the predetermined goals created by the budget. This creates a situation
   where managers may choose to act unethically and pressure accountants to report favorable financial
   results not supported by the operations.

   Accountants need to be aware of this circumstance and use ethical standards when assisting the
   development and creation of budgets. After a proper budget has been created, the reporting of the
   actual results will assist in creating a realistic and honest picture of the actual operations for the
   managers reviewing the budget. The budget accountant needs to take steps to ensure that employees
   are not trying to misreport the budget results; for example, managers might be tempted to set artificially
   low standards to ensure that targets are hit and significantly exceeded. Such results could lead to what
   might be considered as excessive bonuses paid to managers.
350                                                                               Chapter 7 Budgeting

The Basics of Budgeting

All companies--large and small--have limits on the amount of money or resources they can receive and pay
out. How these resources are used to reach their goals and objectives must be planned. The quantitative plan
estimating when and how much cash or other resources will be received and when and how the cash or other
resources will be used is the budget. As you've learned, some of the benefits of budgeting include improved
communication, planning, coordination, and evaluation.

All budgets are quantitative plans for the future and will be constructed based on the needs of the
organization for which the budget is being created. Depending on the complexity, some budgets can take
months or even years to develop. The most common time period covered by a budget is one year, although
the time period may vary from strategic, long-term budgets to very detailed, short-term budgets. Generally,
the closer the company is to the start of the budget's time period, the more detailed the budget becomes.

Management begins with a vision of the future. The long-term vision sets the direction of the company. The
vision develops into goals and strategies that are built into the budget and are directly or indirectly reflected
on the master budget.

The master budget has two major categories: the financial budget and the operating budget. The financial
budget plans the use of assets and liabilities and results in a projected balance sheet. The operating budget
helps plan future revenue and expenses and results in a projected income statement. The operating budget
has several subsidiary budgets that all begin with projected sales. For example, management estimates sales
for the upcoming few years. It then breaks down estimated sales into quarters, months, and weeks and
prepares the sales budget. The sales budget is the foundation for other operating budgets. Management uses
the number of units from the sales budget and the company's inventory policy to determine how many units
need to be produced. This information in units and in dollars becomes the production budget.

The production budget is then broken up into budgets for materials, labor, and overhead, which use the
standard quantity and standard price for raw materials that need to be purchased, the standard direct labor
rate and the standard direct labor hours that need to be scheduled, and the standard costs for all other direct
and indirect operating expenses. Companies use the historic quantities of the amount of material per unit and
the hours of direct labor per unit to compute a standard used to estimate the quantity of materials and labor
hours needed for the expected level of production. Current costs are used to develop standard costs for the
price of materials, the direct labor rate, as well as an estimate of overhead costs.

The budget development process results in various budgets for various purposes, such as revenue, expenses,
or units produced, but they all begin with a plan. To save time and eliminate unnecessary repetition,
management often starts with the current year's budget and adjusts it to meet future needs.

There are various strategies companies use in adjusting the budget amounts and planning for the future. For
example, budgets can be derived from a top-down approach or from a bottom-up approach. Figure 7.2 shows
the general difference between the top-down approach and the bottom-up approach. The top-down approach
typically begins with senior management. The goals, assumptions, and predicted revenue and expenses
information are passed from the senior manager to middle managers, who further pass the information
downward. Each department must then determine how it can allocate its expenses efficiently while still
meeting the company goals. The benefit of this approach is that it ties in to the strategic plan and company
goals. Another benefit of passing the amount of allowed expenses downward is that the final anticipated costs
are reduced by the vetting (fact checking and information gathering) process.

In the top-down approach, management must devote attention to efficiently allocating resources to ensure
that expenses are not padded to create budgetary slack. The drawback to this approach to budgeting is that

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 7 Budgeting                                                                                  351

the budget is prepared by individuals who are not familiar with specific operations and expenses to
understand each department's nuances.

Figure 7.2 Top-Down versus Bottom-Up Approach to Budgeting. The top-down approach to budgeting starts
with upper level management, while the bottom-up approach starts with input from lower-level management.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

The bottom-up approach (sometimes also named a self-imposed or participative budget) begins at the lowest
level of the company. After senior management has communicated the expected departmental goals, the
departments then plans and predicts their sales and estimates the amount of resources needed to reach these
goals. This information is communicated to the supervisor, who then passes it on to upper levels of
management. The advantages of this approach are that managers feel their work is valued and that
knowledgeable individuals develop the budget with realistic numbers. Therefore, the budget is more likely to
be attainable. The drawback is that managers may not fully understand or may misunderstand the strategic
plan.

Other approaches in addition to the top-down and bottom-up approaches are a combination approach and
the zero-based budgeting approach. In the combination approach, guidelines and targets are set at the top
while the managers work to develop a budget within the targeted parameters.

Zero-based budgeting begins with zero dollars and then adds to the budget only revenues and expenses that
can be supported or justified. Figure 7.3 illustrates the difference between traditional budget preparation and
zero-based budgeting in a bottom-up budgeting scenario. The advantage to zero-based budgeting is that
unnecessary expenses are eliminated because managers cannot justify them. The drawback is that every
expense needs to be justified, including obvious ones, so it takes a lot of time to complete. A compromise
tactic is to use a zero-based budgeting approach for certain expenses, like travel, that can be easily justified
and linked to the company goals.
352  Chapter 7 Budgeting

Figure 7.3 Comparison of Traditional Budgeting Process and Zero-Based Budgeting Process. In a bottom-up
budgeting environment, the budget process begins with lower level or operational management. Under a
traditional budgeting, last year's budget would be the starting point for creating the current budget. Under a
zero-based budgeting approach, all budget numbers are derived newly each year or budget cycle. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Often budgets are developed so they can adjust for changes in the volume or activity and help management
make decisions. Changes and challenges can affect the budget and have an impact on a company's plans. A
flexible budget adjusts the cost of goods produced for varying levels of production and is more useful than a
static budget, which remains at one amount regardless of the production level. A flexible budget is created at
the end of the accounting period, whereas the static budget is created before the fiscal year begins.
Additionally Figure 7.4 shows a comparison of a static budget and a flexible budget for Bingo's Bags, a
company that produces purses and backpacks. In the flexible budget, the budgeted costs are calculated with
actual sales, whereas in the static budget, budgeted costs are calculated with budgeted sales. The flexible
budget allows management to see what they would expect the budget to look like based on the actual sales
and budgeted costs. Flexible budgets are addressed in greater detail in Prepare Flexible Budgets.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 7 Budgeting  353

Figure 7.4 Comparison of a Flexible Budget and a Static Budget. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
In order to handle changes that occur in the future, companies can also use a rolling budget, which is one
that is continuously updated. While the company's goals may be multi-year, the rolling budget is adjusted
monthly, and a new month is added as each month passes. Rolling budgets allow management to respond to
changes in estimates or actual occurrences, but it also takes management away from other duties as it
requires continual updating. Figure 7.5 shows an example of how a rolling quarterly budget would work.
Notice that as one month rolls off (is completed) another month is added to the budget so that four quarters
of a year are always presented.

Figure 7.5 Rolling Budget. In a quarterly operating budget, the budget always projects forward for four
months, or one quarter. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Because budgets are used to evaluate a manager's performance as well as the company's, managers are
responsible for specific expenses within their own budget. Each manager's performance is evaluated by how
well he or she manages the revenues and expenses under his or her control. Each individual who exercises
control over spending should have a budget specifying limits on that spending.
354                                                                               Chapter 7 Budgeting

The Role of the Master Budget

Most organizations will create a master budget--whether that organization is large or small, public or private,
or a merchandising, manufacturing, or service company. A master budget is one that includes two areas,
operational and financial, each of which has its own sub-budgets. The operating budget spans several areas
that help plan and manage day-to-day business. The financial budget depicts the expectations for cash
inflows and outflows, including cash payments for planned operations, the purchase or sale of assets, the
payment or financing of loans, and changes in equity. Each of the sub-budgets is made up of separate but
interrelated budgets, and the number and type of separate budgets will differ depending on the type and size
of the organization. For example, the sales budget predicts the sales expected for each quarter. The direct
materials budget uses information from the sales budget to compute the number of units necessary for
production. This information is used in other budgets, such as the direct materials budget, which plans when
materials will be purchased, how much will be purchased, and how much that material should cost. You will
review some specific examples of budgeting for direct materials in Prepare Operating Budgets.

Figure 7.6 shows how operating budgets and financial budgets are related within a master budget.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 7 Budgeting                                                                                   355

Figure 7.6 Operating Budgets, Financial Budgets, and the Relationship between Budgets. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
356                                                                               Chapter 7 Budgeting

The Role of Operating Budgets

An operating budget consists of the sales budget, production budget, direct material budget, direct labor
budget, and overhead budget. These budgets serve to assist in planning and monitoring the day-to-day
activities of the organization by informing management of how many units need to be produced, how much
material needs to be ordered, how many labor hours need to be scheduled, and the amount of overhead
expected to be incurred. The individual pieces of the operating budget collectively lead to the creation of the
budgeted income statement. For example, Big Bad Bikes estimates it will sell 1,000 trainers for $70 each in the
first quarter and prepares a sales budget to show the sales by quarter. Management understands that it needs
to have on hand the 1,000 trainers that it estimates will be sold. It also understands that additional inventory
needs to be on hand in the event there are additional sales and to prepare for sales in the second quarter. This
information is used to develop a production budget. Each trainer requires 3.2 pounds of material that usually
costs $1.25 per pound. Knowing how many units are to be produced and how much inventory needs to be on
hand is used to develop a direct materials budget.

The direct materials budget lets managers know when and how much raw materials need to be ordered. The
same is true for direct labor, as management knows how many units will be manufactured and how many
hours of direct labor are needed. The necessary hours of direct labor and the estimated labor rate are used to
develop the direct labor budget. While the materials and labor are determined from the production budget,
only the variable overhead can be determined from the production budget. Existing information regarding
fixed manufacturing costs are combined with variable manufacturing costs to determine the manufacturing
overhead budget. The information from the sales budget is used to determine the sales and administrative
budget. Finally, the sales, direct materials, direct labor, fixed manufacturing overhead budget, and sales and
administrative budgets are used to develop a pro-forma income statement.

The Role of Financial Budgets

A financial budget consists of the cash budget, the budgeted balance sheet, and the budget for capital
expenses. Similar to the individual budgets that make up the operating budgets, the financial budgets serve to
assist with planning and monitoring the financing requirements of the organization. Management plans its
capital asset needs and states them in the capital expense budget. Management addresses its collection and
payment policies to determine when it will receive cash from sales and when it will pay the material, labor, and
overhead expenses. The capital expense budget and the estimated payment and collection of cash allow
management to build a cash budget and determine when it will need financing or have additional funds to pay
back loans. These budgets taken together will be part of the budgeted balance sheet. Figure 7.6 shows how
these budgets relate.

     YOUR TURN

     Maintaining a Cash Balance

     DaQuan recently began work as a senior accountant at Mad Coffee Company. He learned he would be
     responsible for monitoring the cash balance because there is a bank loan requirement that a minimum
     balance of $10,000 be maintained with the bank at all times. DaQuan asked to see the cash budget so he
     could anticipate when the balance was most likely to go below $10,000. How can DaQuan determine

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 7 Budgeting                                                                                        357

potential cash balance issues by looking at the budget?

Solution

Budgeting helps plan for those times when cash is in short supply and bills need to be paid. Proper
budgeting shows when and for how long a cash shortage may exist. DaQuan can see the months when
the cash payments exceed the cash receipts and when the company is in danger of having a cash
balance below the minimum requirement of $10,000. Knowing the inflow and outflow of cash will help
him plan and manage the shortage through a line of credit, delay in purchasing, delay in hiring, or delay
in payment of non-essential items.

LINK TO LEARNING

Budgeting is a task that should be completed by all organizations, not only those limited to
manufacturing. Unfortunately, there are many individuals who want to operate a business and know
nothing about budgeting. Often, professional organizations or industry trade groups offer information to
help their members succeed in business. For example, the real estate profession provides information
and suggestions such as this article on preparing a marketing budget (https://openstax.org/l/
50RealtorMag) to help professionals.

 7.2 Prepare Operating Budgets

Operating budgets are a primary component of the master budget and involve examining the expectations for
the primary operations of the business. Assumptions such as sales in units, sales price, manufacturing costs
per unit, and direct material needed per unit involve a significant amount of time and input from various parts
of the organization. It is important to obtain all of the information, however, because the more accurate the
information, the more accurate the resulting budget, and the more likely management is to effectively monitor
and achieve its budget goals.

Individual Operating Budgets

In order for an organization to align the budget with the strategic plan, it must budget for the day-to-day
operations of the business. This means the company must understand when and how many sales will occur, as
well as what expenses are required to generate those sales. In short, each component--sales, production, and
other expenses--must be properly budgeted to generate the operating budget components and the resulting
pro-forma budgeted income statement.

The budgeting process begins with the estimate of sales. When management has a solid estimate of sales for
each quarter, month, week, or other relevant time period, they can determine how many units must be
produced. From there, they determine the expenditures, such as direct materials necessary to produce the
units. It is critical for the sales estimate to be accurate so that management knows how many units to produce.
If the estimate is understated, the company will not have enough inventory to satisfy customers, and they will
358  Chapter 7 Budgeting

not have ordered enough material or scheduled enough direct labor to manufacture more units. Customers
may then shop somewhere else to meet their needs. Likewise, if sales are overestimated, management will
have purchased more material than necessary and have a larger labor force than needed. This overestimate
will cause management to have spent more cash than was necessary.

Sales Budget

The sales budget details the expected sales in units and the sales price for the budget period. The information
from the sales budget is carried to several places in the master budget. It is used to determine how many units
must be produced as well as when and how much cash will be collected from those sales.

For example, Big Bad Bikes used information from competitor sales, its marketing department, and industry
trends to estimate the number of units that will be sold in each quarter of the coming year. The number of
units is multiplied by the sales price to determine the sales by quarter as shown in Figure 7.7.

Figure 7.7 Sales Budget for Big Bad Bikes. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-
NC-SA 4.0 license)

The sales budget leads into the production budget to determine how many units must be produced each
week, month, quarter, or year. It also leads into the cash receipts budget, which will be discussed in Prepare
Financial Budgets.

Production Budget

Estimating sales leads to identifying the desired quantity of inventory to meet the demand. Management
wants to have enough inventory to meet production, but they do not want too much in the ending inventory to
avoid paying for unnecessary storage. Management often uses a formula to estimate how much should
remain in ending inventory. Management wants to be flexible with its budgeting, wants to create budgets that
can grow or shrink as needed, and needs to have inventory on hand. So the amount of ending inventory often
is a percentage of the next week's, month's, or quarter's sales.
In creating the production budget, a major issue is how much inventory should be on hand. Having inventory
on hand helps the company avoid losing a customer because the product isn't available. However, there are
storage costs associated with holding inventory as well as having a lag time between paying to manufacture a
product and receiving cash from selling that product. Management must balance the two issues and
determine the amount of inventory that should be available.
When determining the number of units needed to be produced, start with the estimated sales plus the desired
ending inventory to derive the maximum number of units that must be available during the period. Since the
number of units in beginning inventory are already produced, subtracting the beginning inventory from the

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 7 Budgeting  359

goods available results in the number of units that need to be produced.

After management has estimated how many units will sell and how many units need to be in ending inventory,
it develops the production budget to compute the number of units that need to be produced during each
quarter. The formula is the reverse of the formula for the cost of goods sold.

The number of units expected to be sold plus the desired ending inventory equals the number of units that are
available. When the beginning inventory is subtracted from the number of units available, management knows
how many units must be produced during that quarter to meet sales.

In a merchandising firm, retailers do not produce their inventory but purchase it. Therefore, stores such as
Walmart do not have raw materials and instead substitute the number of units to be purchased in place of the
number of units to be produced; the result is the merchandise inventory to be purchased.

To illustrate the steps in developing a production budget, recall that Big Bad Bikes is introducing a new
product that the marketing department thinks will have strong sales. For new products, Big Bad Bikes requires
a target ending inventory of 30% of the next quarter's sales. Unfortunately, they were unable to manufacture
any units before the end of the current year, so the first quarter's beginning inventory is 0 units. As shown in
Figure 7.7, sales in quarter 2 are estimated at 1,000 units; since 30% is required to be in ending inventory, the
ending inventory for quarter 1 needs to be 300 units. With expected sales of 1,000 units for quarter 2 and a
required ending inventory of 30%, or 300 units, Big Bad Bikes needs to have 1,300 units available during the
quarter. Since 1,300 units needed to be available and there are zero units in beginning inventory, Big Bad Bikes
needs to manufacture 1,300 units, as shown in Figure 7.8

Figure 7.8 Production Budget for Big Bad Bikes. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

The ending inventory from one quarter is the beginning inventory for the next quarter and the calculations are
all the same. In order to determine the ending inventory in quarter 4, Big Bad Bikes must estimate the sales
for the first quarter of the next year. Big Bad Bikes's marketing department believes sales will increase in each
of the next several quarters, and they estimate sales as 3,500 for the first quarter of the next year and 4,500 for
360                                                                               Chapter 7 Budgeting

the second quarter of the next year. Thirty percent of 3,500 is 1,050, so the number of units required in the
ending inventory for quarter 4 is 1,050.

The number of units needed in production for the first quarter of the next year provides information needed
for other budgets such as the direct materials budget, so Big Bad Bikes must also determine the number of
units needed in production for that first quarter. The estimated sales of 3,500 and the desired ending
inventory of 1,350 (30% of the next quarter's estimated sales of 4,500) determines that 4,850 units are required
during the quarter. The beginning inventory is estimated to be 1,050, which means the number of units that
need to be produced during the first quarter of year 2 is 3,800.

The number of units needed to be produced each quarter was computed from the estimated sales and is used
to determine the quantity of direct or raw material to purchase, to schedule enough direct labor to
manufacture the units, and to approximate the overhead required for production. It is also necessary to
estimate the sales for the first quarter of the next year. The ending inventory for the current year is based on
the sales estimates for the first quarter of the following year. From this amount, the production budget and
direct materials budget are calculated and flow to the operating and cash budget.

Direct Materials Budget

From the production budget, management knows how many units need to be produced in each budget
period. Management is already aware of how much material it needs to produce each unit and can combine
the direct material per unit with the production budget to compute the direct materials budget. This
information is used to ensure the correct quantity of materials is ordered and the correct amount is budgeted
for those materials.

Similar to the production budget, management wants to have an ending inventory available to ensure there
are enough materials on hand. The direct materials budget illustrates how much material needs to be ordered
and how much that material costs. The calculation is similar to that used in the production budget, with the
addition of the cost per unit.

If Big Bad Bikes uses 3.2 pounds of material for each trainer it manufactures and each pound of material costs
$1.25, we can create a direct materials budget. Management's goal is to have 20% of the next quarter's
material needs on hand as the desired ending materials inventory. Therefore, the determination of each
quarter's material needs is partially dependent on the following quarter's production requirements. The
desired ending inventory of material is readily determined for quarters 1 through 3 as those needs are based
on the production requirements for quarters 2 through 4. To compute the desired ending materials inventory
for quarter 4, we need the production requirements for quarter 1 of year 2. Recall that the number of units to
be produced during the first quarter of year 2 is 3,800. Thus, quarter 4 materials ending inventory requirement
is 20% of 3,800. That information is used to compute the direct materials budget shown in Figure 7.9.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 7 Budgeting  361

Figure 7.9 Direct Materials Budget for Big Bad Bikes. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Management knows how much the materials will cost and integrates this information into the schedule of
expected cash disbursements, which will be shown in Prepare Financial Budgets. This information will also be
used in the budgeted income statement and on the budgeted balance sheet. With 6,000 units estimated for
sale, 3.2 pounds of material per unit, and $1.25 per pound, the direct materials used represent $24,000 of the
cost of goods sold. The remaining $7,240 is included in ending inventory as units completed and raw material.

Direct Labor Budget

Management uses the same information in the production budget to develop the direct labor budget. This
information is used to ensure that the proper amount of staff is available for production and that there is
money available to pay for the labor, including potential overtime. Typically, the number of hours is computed
and then multiplied by an hourly rate, so the total direct labor cost is known.

If Big Bad Bikes knows that they need 45 minutes or 0.75 hours of direct labor for each unit produced, and the
labor rate for this type of manufacturing is $20 per hour, the computation for direct labor simply begins with
the number of units in the production budget. As shown in Figure 7.10, the number of units produced each
quarter multiplied by the number of hours per unit equals the required direct labor hours needed to be
scheduled in order to meet production needs. The total number of hours is next multiplied by the direct labor
rate per hour, and the labor cost can be budgeted and used in the cash disbursement budget and operating
budget illustrated in Prepare Financial Budgets.
362                                                                               Chapter 7 Budgeting

Figure 7.10 Direct Labor Budget for Big Bad Bikes. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under
CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

The direct labor of $105,750 will be apportioned to the budgeted income statement and budgeted balance
sheet. With 0.75 hours of direct labor per unit and $20 per direct labor hour, each unit will cost $15 in direct
labor. Of the 7,050 units produced, 6,000 units will be sold, so $90,000 represents the labor portion of the cost
of goods sold and will be shown on the income statement, while the remaining $15,750 will be the labor
portion of ending inventory and will be shown on the balance sheet.

Manufacturing Overhead Budget

The manufacturing overhead budget includes the remainder of the production costs not covered by the
direct materials and direct labor budgets. In the manufacturing overhead budgeting process, producers will
typically allocate overhead costs depending upon their cost behavior production characteristics, which are
generally classified as either variable or fixed. Based on this allocation process, the variable component will be
treated as occurring proportionately in relation to budgeted activity, while the fixed component will be treated
as remaining constant. This process is similar to the overhead allocation process you learned in studying
product, process, or activity-based costing.

For Big Bad Bikes to create their manufacturing overhead budget, they first determine that the appropriate
driver for assigning overhead costs to products is direct labor hours. The overhead allocation rates for the
variable overhead costs are: indirect material of $1.00 per hour, indirect labor of $1.25 per hour, maintenance
of $0.25 per hour, and utilities of $0.50 per hour. The fixed overhead costs per quarter are: supervisor salaries
of $15,000, fixed maintenance salaries of $4,000, insurance of $7,000, and depreciation expenses of $3,000.

Given the direct labor hours for each quarter from the direct labor budget, the variable costs are the number
of hours multiplied by the variable overhead application rate. The fixed costs are the same for each quarter, as
shown in the manufacturing overhead budget in Figure 7.11.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 7 Budgeting  363

Figure 7.11 Manufacturing Overhead Budget for Big Bad Bikes. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

The total manufacturing overhead cost was $131,863 for 7,050 units, or $18.70 per unit (rounded). Since 6,000
units are sold, $112,200 (6,000 units × $18.70 /unit) will be expensed as cost of goods sold, while the remaining
$19,663 will be part of finished goods ending inventory.

Sales and Administrative Expenses Budget

The direct materials budget, the direct labor budget, and the manufacturing overhead budget plan for all costs
related to production, while the selling and administrative expense budget contains a listing of variable and
fixed expenses estimated to be incurred in all areas other than production costs. While this one budget
contains all nonmanufacturing expenses, in practice, it actually comprises several small budgets created by
managers in sales and administrative positions. All managers must follow the budget, but setting an
appropriate budget for selling and administrative functions is complicated and is not always thoroughly
understood by managers without a background in managerial accounting.

If Big Bad Bikes pays a sales commission of $2 per unit sold and a transportation cost of $0.50 per unit, they
can use these costs to put together their sales and administrative budget. All other costs are fixed costs per
quarter: sales salaries of $5,000; administrative salaries of $5,000; marketing expenses of $5,000; insurance of
$1,000; and depreciation of $2,000. The sales and administrative budget is shown in Figure 7.12, along with the
budgeted sales used in the computation of variable sales and administrative expenses.
364  Chapter 7 Budgeting

Figure 7.12 Sales and Administrative Expense Budget for Big Bad Bikes. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Only manufacturing costs are treated as a product cost and included in ending inventory, so all of the
expenses in the sales and administrative budget are period expenses and included in the budgeted income
statement.

Budgeted Income Statement

A budgeted income statement is formatted similarly to a traditional income statement except that it contains
budgeted data. Once all of the operating budgets have been created, these costs are used to prepare a
budgeted income statement and budgeted balance sheet. The manufacturing costs are allocated to the cost of
goods sold and the ending inventory.
Big Bad Bikes uses the information on direct materials (Figure 7.9), direct labor (Figure 7.10), and
manufacturing overhead (Figure 7.11) to allocate the manufacturing costs between the cost of goods sold and
the ending work in process inventory, as shown in (Figure 7.13).

Figure 7.13 Allocating Costs to Cost of Goods Sold and Ending Work in Process Inventory for Big Bad Bikes.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 7 Budgeting  365

Once they perform this allocation, the budgeted income statement can be prepared. Big Bad Bikes estimates
an interest of $954. It also estimates that $22,000 of its income will not be collected and will be reported as
uncollectible expense. The budgeted income statement is shown in Figure 7.14.

Figure 7.14 Budgeted Income Statement for Big Bad Bikes. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

   THINK IT THROUGH

   Errors in a Budgeted Balance Sheet

   Which error has the potential to cause more problems with the budgeted balance sheet: overstating
   sales or understating the cash collected?

 7.3 Prepare Financial Budgets

Now that you have developed an understanding of operating budgets, let's turn to the other primary
component of the master budget: financial budgets. Preparing financial budgets involves examining the
expectations for financing the operations of the business and planning for the cash needs of the organization.
The budget helps estimate the source, amount, and timing of cash collection and cash payments as well as
determine if and when additional financing is needed or debt can be paid.

Individual Financial Budgets

Preparing a financial budget first requires preparing the capital asset budget, the cash budgets, and the
budgeted balance sheet. The capital asset budget represents a significant investment in cash, and the amount
is carried to the cash budget. Therefore, it needs to be prepared before the cash budget. If the cash will not be
available, the capital asset budget can be adjusted and, again, carried to the cash budget.
When the budgets are complete, the beginning and ending balance from the cash budget, changes in
366  Chapter 7 Budgeting

financing, and changes in equity are shown on the budgeted balance sheet.

Capital Asset Budget

The capital asset budget, also called the capital expenditure budget, shows the company's plans to invest in
long-term assets. Some assets, such as computers, must be replaced every few years, while other assets, such
as manufacturing equipment, are purchased very infrequently. Some assets can be purchased with cash,
whereas others may require a loan. Budgeting for these types of expenditures requires long-range planning
because the purchases affect cash flows in current and future periods and affect the income statement due to
depreciation and interest expenses.

Cash Budget

The cash budget is the combined budget of all inflows and outflows of cash. It should be divided into the
shortest time period possible, so management can be quickly made aware of potential problems resulting
from fluctuations in cash flow. One goal of this budget is to anticipate the timing of cash inflows and outflows,
which allows a company to try to avoid a decrease in the cash balance due to paying out more cash than it
receives. In order to provide timely feedback and alert management to short-term cash needs, the cash flow
budget is commonly geared toward monthly or quarterly figures. Figure 7.15 shows how the other budgets tie
into the cash budget.

Figure 7.15 Relationship between Budgets. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-
NC-SA 4.0 license)

Cash is so important to the operations of a company that, often, companies will arrange to have an emergency
cash source, such as a line of credit, to avoid defaulting on current payables due and also to protect against
other unanticipated expenses, such as major repair costs on equipment. This line of credit would be similar in
function to the overdraft protection offered on many checking accounts.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 7 Budgeting                                                                                               367

Because the cash budget accounts for every inflow and outflow of cash, it is broken down into smaller
components. The cash collections schedule includes all of the cash inflow expected to be received from
customer sales, whether those customers pay at the same rate or even if they pay at all. The cash collections
schedule includes all the cash expected to be received and does not include the amount of the receivables
estimated as uncollectible. The cash payments schedule plans the outflow or payments of all accounts
payable, showing when cash will be used to pay for direct material purchases. Both the cash collections
schedule and the cash payments schedule are included along with other cash transactions in a cash budget.
The cash budget, then, combines the cash collection schedule, the cash payment schedule, and all other
budgets that plan for the inflow or outflow of cash. When everything is combined into one budget, that budget
shows if financing arrangements are needed to maintain balances or if excess cash is available to pay for
additional liabilities or assets.

The operating budgets all begin with the sales budget. The cash collections schedule does as well. Since
purchases are made at varying times during the period and cash is received from customers at varying rates,
data are needed to estimate how much will be collected in the month of sale, the month after the sale, two
months after the sale, and so forth. Bad debts also need to be estimated, since that is cash that will not be
collected.

To illustrate, let's return to Big Bad Bikes. They believe cash collections for the trainer sales will be similar to
the collections from their bicycle sales, so they will use that pattern to budget cash collections for the trainers.
In the quarter of sales, 65% of that quarter's sales will be collected. In the quarter after the sale, 30% will be
collected. This leaves 5% of the sales considered uncollectible. Figure 7.16 illustrates when each quarter's sales
will be collected. An estimate of the net realizable balance of Accounts Receivable can be reconciled by using
information from the cash collections schedule:

Figure 7.16 Illustration of a Cash Collections Schedule. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

For example, in quarter 1 of year 2, 65% of the quarter 1 sales will be collected in cash, as well as 30% of the
sales from quarter 4 of the prior year. There were no sales in quarter 4 of the prior year so 30% of zero sales
368                                                                               Chapter 7 Budgeting

shows the collections are $0. Using information from Big Bad Bikes sales budget, the cash collections from the
sales are shown in Figure 7.17.

Figure 7.17 Cash Collections Schedule for Big Bad Bikes. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

When the cash collections schedule is made for sales, management must account for other potential cash
collections such as cash received from the sale of equipment or the issuance of stock. These are listed
individually in the cash inflows portion of the cash budget.

The cash payments schedule, on the other hand, shows when cash will be used to pay for Accounts Payable.
One such example are direct material purchases, which originates from the direct materials budget. When the
production budget is determined from the sales, management prepares the direct materials budget to
determine when and how much material needs to be ordered. Orders for materials take place throughout the
quarter, and payments for the purchases are made at different intervals from the orders. A schedule of cash
payments is similar to the cash collections schedule, except that it accounts for the company's purchases
instead of the company's sales. The information from the cash payments schedule feeds into the cash budget.

Big Bad Bikes typically pays half of its purchases in the quarter of purchase. The remaining half is paid in the
following quarter, so payments in the first quarter include payments for purchases made during the first
quarter as well as half of the purchases for the preceding quarter. Figure 7.18 shows when each quarter's
purchases will be paid. Additionally, the balance of purchases in Accounts Payable can be reconciled by using
information from the cash payment schedule as follows:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 7 Budgeting  369

Figure 7.18   Cash Payment Schedule. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA
4.0 license)

The first quarter of the year plans cash payments from the prior quarter as well as the current quarter. Again,
since the trainers are a new product, in this example, there are no purchases in the preceding quarter, and the
payments are $0. Figure 7.19.

Figure 7.19 Cash Payments Schedule for Big Bad Bikes. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

While the cash payments schedule is made for purchases of material on account, there are other outflows of
cash for the company, and management must estimate all other cash payments for the year. Typically, this
includes the manufacturing overhead budget, the sales and administrative budget, the capital asset budget,
and any other potential payments of cash. Since depreciation is an expense not requiring cash, the cash
budget includes the amount from the budgets less depreciation. Cash payments are listed on the cash budget
following cash receipts. Figure 7.20 shows the major components of the cash budget.
370                                                                               Chapter 7 Budgeting

Figure 7.20 General Overview of Cash Budget Components. A cash budget will contain all the budgeted cash
inflows and out flows from the sub-budgets as well as any cash items that might not appear on one of the sub-
budgets. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

The cash budget totals the cash receipts and adds it to the beginning cash balance to determine the available
cash. From the available cash, the cash payments are subtracted to compute the net cash excess or deficiency
of cash for the quarter. This amount is the potential ending cash balance. Organizations typically require a
minimum cash balance. If the potential ending cash balance does not meet the minimum amount,
management must plan to acquire financing to reach that amount. If the potential ending cash balance
exceeds the minimum cash balance, the excess amount may be used to pay any financing loans and interest.

Big Bad Bikes has a minimum cash balance requirement of $10,000 and has a line of credit available for an
interest rate of 19%. They also plan to issue additional capital stock for $5,000 in the first quarter, to pay taxes
of $1,000 during each quarter, and to purchase a copier for $8,500 cash in the third quarter. The beginning
cash balance for Big Bad Bikes is $13,000, which can be used to create the cash budget shown in Figure 7.21.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 7 Budgeting                                                                   371

Figure 7.21 Cash Budget for Big Bad Bikes. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-
NC-SA 4.0 license)

Budgeted Balance Sheet

The cash budget shows how cash changes from the beginning of the year to the end of the year, and the
ending cash balance is the amount shown on the budgeted balance sheet. The budgeted balance sheet is the
estimated assets, liabilities, and equities that the company would have at the end of the year if their
performance were to meet its expectations. Table 7.1 shows a list of the most common changes to the balance
sheet and where the information is derived.

   Information Source  Common Changes in the Budgeted Balance Sheet
                                                                Balance Sheet Change
Cash balance
                         ending cash balance from the cash budget
Accounts Receivable      uncollected receivables from the cash collections schedule
balance

Table 7.1
372                                                                        Chapter 7 Budgeting

                         Common Changes in the Budgeted Balance Sheet

     Information Source  Balance Sheet Change

Inventory                ending balance in inventory as shown from calculations to create the income
                         statement

Machinery & Equipment ending balance in the capital asset budget

Accounts Payable         unpaid purchases from the cash payments schedule

Table 7.1

Other balance sheet changes throughout the year are reflected in the income statement and statement of
cash flows. For example, the beginning cash balance of Accounts Receivable plus the sales, less the cash
collected results in the ending balance of Accounts Receivable. A similar formula is used to compute the
ending balance in Accounts Payable. Other budgets and information such as the capital asset budget,
depreciation, and financing loans are used as well.

To explain how to use a budgeted balance sheet, let's return to Big Bad Bikes. For simplicity, assume that they
did not have accounts receivable or payable at the beginning of the year. They also incurred and paid back
their financing during the year, so there is no ending debt. However, the cash budget shows cash inflows and
outflows not related to sales or the purchase of materials. The company's capital assets increased by $8,500
from the copier purchase, and their common stock increased by $5,000 from the additional issue as shown in
Figure 7.22.

Figure 7.22 Budgeted Balance Sheet for Big Bad Bikes. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Though there seem to be many budgets, they all fit together like a puzzle to create an overall picture of how a

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 7 Budgeting  373

company expects the upcoming business year to look. Figure 7.15 detailed the components of the master
budget, and can be used to summarize the budget process. All budgets begin with the sales budget. This
budget estimates the number of units that need to be manufactured and precedes the production budget. The
production budget (refer to Figure 7.6) provides the necessary information for the budgets needed to plan
how many units will be produced. Knowing how many units need to be produced from the production budget,
the direct materials budget, direct labor budget, and the manufacturing overhead budget are all prepared.
The sales and administrative budget is a nonmanufacturing budget that relies on the sales estimates to pay
commissions and other variable expenses. The sales and expenses estimated in all of these budgets are used
to develop a budgeted income statement.

The estimated sales information is used to prepare the cash collections schedule, and the direct materials
budget is used to prepare the cash payment schedule. The cash receipts and cash payments budget are
combined with the direct labor budget, the manufacturing overhead budget, the sales and administrative
budget, and the capital assets budget to develop the cash budget. Finally, all the information is used to flow to
the budgeted balance sheet.

   YOUR TURN

   Creating a Master Budget

   Molly Malone is starting her own company in which she will produce and sell Molly's Macaroons. Molly is
   trying to learn about the budget process as she puts her business plan together. Help Molly by
   explaining the optimal order for preparing the following budgets and schedules and why this is the
   optimal order.

      · budgeted balance sheet
      · budgeted income statement
      · capital asset budget
      · cash budget
      · cash collections schedule
      · cash payments schedule
      · direct materials budget
      · direct labor budget
      · master budget
      · manufacturing overhead
      · production budget
      · sales budget
      · selling and administrative budget

   Solution

   A master budget always begins with the sales budget must be prepared first as this determines the
   number of units that will need to be produced. The next step would be to create the production budget,
   which helps determine the number of units that will need to be produced each period to meet sales
   goals. Once Molly knows how many units she will need to produce, she will need to budget the costs
374                                                                               Chapter 7 Budgeting

     associated with those units, which will require her to create the direct materials budget, the direct labor
     budget and the manufacturing overhead budget. But Molly will have costs other than manufacturing
     costs so she will need to create a selling and administrative expenses budget. Molly will need to
     determine what are her capital asset needs and budget for those. Now that Molly has all her revenues
     budgeted and her costs budgeted, she can determine her budgeted cash inflows and outflows by putting
     together the cash schedules that lead to the cash budget. Molly will then need to create a cash
     collections schedule and a cash payments schedule and that information, along with the cash inflow and
     outflow information from her other budgets, will allow her to create her cash budget. Once Molly has
     completed her cash budget she will be able to put together her budgeted income statement and
     budgeted balance sheet.

 7.4 Prepare Flexible Budgets

A company makes a budget for the smallest time period possible so that management can find and adjust
problems to minimize their impact on the business. Everything starts with the estimated sales, but what
happens if the sales are more or less than expected? How does this affect the budget? What adjustments does
a company have to make in order to compare the actual numbers to budgeted numbers when evaluating
results? If production is higher than planned and has been increased to meet the increased sales, expenses
will be over budget. But is this bad? To account for actual sales and expenses differing from budgeted sales
and expenses, companies will often create flexible budgets to allow budgets to fluctuate with future demand.

Flexible Budgets

A flexible budget is one based on different volumes of sales. A flexible budget flexes the static budget for
each anticipated level of production. This flexibility allows management to estimate what the budgeted
numbers would look like at various levels of sales. Flexible budgets are prepared at each analysis period
(usually monthly), rather than in advance, since the idea is to compare the operating income to the expenses
deemed appropriate at the actual production level.

Big Bad Bikes is planning to use a flexible budget when they begin making trainers. The company knows its
variable costs per unit and knows it is introducing its new product to the marketplace. Its estimations of sales
and sales price will likely change as the product takes hold and customers purchase it. Big Bad Bikes
developed a flexible budget that shows the change in income and expenses as the number of units changes. It
also looked at the effect a change in price would have if the number of units remained the same. The expenses
that do not change are the fixed expenses, as shown in Figure 7.23.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 7 Budgeting  375

Figure 7.23 Flexible Budget for Big Bad Bikes. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Static versus Flexible Budgets

A static budget is one that is prepared based on a single level of output for a given period. The master
budget, and all the budgets included in the master budget, are examples of static budgets. Actual results are
compared to the static budget numbers as one means to evaluate company performance. However, this
comparison may be like comparing apples to oranges because variable costs should follow production, which
should follow sales. Thus, if sales differ from what is budgeted, then comparing actual costs to budgeted costs
may not provide a clear indicator of how well the company is meeting its targets. A flexible budget created
each period allows for a comparison of apples to apples because it will calculate budgeted costs based on the
actual sales activity.

For example, Figure 7.24 shows a static quarterly budget for 1,500 trainers sold by Big Bad Bikes. The budget
will change if there are more or fewer units sold.
376  Chapter 7 Budgeting

Figure 7.24 Static Budget for Big Bad Bikes. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-
NC-SA 4.0 license)

Budget with Varying Levels of Production

Companies develop a budget based on their expectations for their most likely level of sales and expenses.
Often, a company can expect that their production and sales volume will vary from budget period to budget
period. They can use their various expected levels of production to create a flexible budget that includes these
different levels of production. Then, they can modify the flexible budget when they have their actual
production volume and compare it to the flexible budget for the same production volume. A flexible budget is
more complicated, requires a solid understanding of a company's fixed and variable expenses, and allows for
greater control over changes that occur throughout the year. For example, suppose a proposed sale of items
does not occur because the expected client opted to go with another supplier. In a static budget situation, this
would result in large variances in many accounts due to the static budget being set based on sales that
included the potential large client. A flexible budget on the other hand would allow management to adjust
their expectations in the budget for both changes in costs and revenue that would occur from the loss of the
potential client. The changes made in the flexible budget would then be compared to what actually occurs to
result in more realistic and representative variance. This ability to change the budget also makes it easier to
pinpoint who is responsible if a revenue or cost target is missed.
Big Bad Bikes used the flexible budget concept to develop a budget based on its expectation that production
levels will vary by quarter. By the fourth quarter, sales are expected to be strong enough to pay back the
financing from earlier in the year. The budget shown in Figure 7.25 illustrates the payment of interest and
contains information helpful to management when determining which items should be produced if production
capacity is limited.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 7 Budgeting                                                                                                              377

Figure 7.25 Varying Production Levels for Big Bad Bikes. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

   CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

   Flexible Budgets and Sustainability

   The ability to provide flexible budgets can be critical in new or changing businesses where the accuracy
   of estimating sales or usage my not be strong. For example, organizations are often reporting their
   sustainability efforts and may have some products that require more electricity than other products. The
   reporting of the energy per unit of output has sometimes been in error and can mislead management
   into making changes that may or may not help the company. For example, based on the energy per unit
   reported, management may decide to change the product mix, the amount that is outsourced, and/or
   the amount that is produced.[1] If the energy output isn't correct, the decisions may be wrong and create
   an adverse impact on the budget.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   In theory, a flexible budget is not difficult to develop since the variable costs change with production and

1 Jon Bartley, et al. "Using Flexible Budgeting to Improve Sustainability Measures.: American Institute of CPAs. Jan. 23, 2017.
https://www.aicpa.org/interestareas/businessindustryandgovernment/resources/sustainability/improvesustainabilitymeasures.html
378                                                                                            Chapter 7 Budgeting

     the fixed costs remain the same. However, planning to meet an organization's goals can be very difficult
     if there are not many variable costs, if the cash inflows are relatively fixed, and if the fixed costs are high.
     For example, this article shows some large U.S. cities are faced with complicated budgets
     (https://openstax.org/l/50HighFixedCost) because of high fixed costs.

 7.5 Explain How Budgets Are Used to Evaluate Goals

As you've learned, an advantage of budgeting is evaluating performance. Having a strong understanding of
their budgets helps managers keep track of expenses and work toward the company's goals. Companies need
to understand their revenue and expense details to develop budgets as a tool for planning operations and
cash flow. Part of understanding revenue and expenses is evaluating the prior year. Did the company earn the
expected profit? Could it have earned a higher profit? What expenses or revenues were not on the budget?
Critically evaluating the actual results versus the estimated budgetary results can help management plan for
the future. Variance analysis helps the manager analyze its results. It does not necessarily find a problem, but
it does indicate where a problem may exist. The same is true for favorable variances as well as unfavorable
variances. A favorable variance occurs when revenue is higher than budgeted or expenses are lower than
budgeted. An unfavorable variance is when revenue is lower than budgeted or expenses are higher than
budgeted.

     Comparing Favorable to Unfavorable Variances

     Favorable                                                                    Unfavorable

Actual Sales > Budgeted Sales        Actual Sales < Budgeted Sales

Actual Expenses < Budgeted Expenses  Actual Expenses > Budgeted expenses

Table 7.2

It is easy to understand that an unfavorable variance may be a problem. But that is not always true, as a
higher labor rate may mean the company has a higher quality employee who is able to waste less material.
Likewise, having a favorable variance indicates that more revenue was earned or less expenses were incurred
but further analysis can indicate if costs were cut too far and better materials should have been purchased.

If a company has only a static budget, meaningful comparisons are difficult. Analyzing the sales for Bid Bad
Bikes will illustrate whether there was a profit and how net income impacts the company. In the third quarter,
Big Bad Bikes sold 1,400 trainers and had third quarter net income of $15,915 as shown in Figure 7.26.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 7 Budgeting  379

Figure 7.26 Actual Quarter 3 Income Statement for Big Bad Bikes. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

The company earned a profit during the third quarter, but what does that mean to the company? Simply
having net income instead of a net loss does not help plan for the future. The third quarter static budget was
for the sale of 1,500 units. Comparing that budget to the actual results shows whether there is a favorable
variance or an unfavorable variance. A comparison of the actual costs with the budget for the third quarter, as
shown in Figure 7.27, has a favorable variance for all of the expenses and an unfavorable variance for
everything associated with revenues.
380  Chapter 7 Budgeting

Figure 7.27 Actual versus Static Budget for Big Bad Bikes. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

How do those results advise management when evaluating the company's performance? It is difficult to look
at one variance and make a conclusion about the company or its management. However, the variances can
help narrow down the areas that need addressing because they differ from the budgeted amount. For
example, looking at the variance when using a static budget does not indicate the amount of the variance
results because they sold 100 fewer units than budgeted. The variance for the cost of goods sold is favorable,
but it should be if production was less than the budget. A static budget does not evaluate whether costs for
1,400 were appropriate for production of those 1,400 units.
Using a static budget to evaluate performance affects the bottom line as well as the individual expenses. The
net income for the sale of 1,400 units is less than the budgeted net income for 1,500 units, but it does not
indicate whether expenses were appropriate for 1,400 units. If there had been 1,600 units sold, the expenses
would be more than the budgeted amount, but sales would be higher. Would it be fair to evaluate a
manager's control over their expenses using a static budget?

   ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

   Budget Manipulation and Ethics Training

   Why is ethics training important? An organization that bases a manager's evaluation and pay on how
   close to the budget the division performs may inadvertently encourage that manager to act unethically
   in order to get a pay raise. Many employees manipulate the budget process to enhance their earnings by
   garnering bonuses based upon questionably ethical behavior and improper financial reporting.
   Generally, this unethical behavior involves either manipulating the numbers in the budget or modifying
   the timing of reports to apply income to a different budget period. Kenton Walker and Gary Fleischman

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 7 Budgeting                                                                                                                       381

studied ethics in budgeting and determined that certain ethics-related structures in a business created a
better operational environment.

The study found that the existence of formal ethical codes, ethics training, good management role
models, and social pressure to be disclosing within an organization can be a deterrent to budget
manipulation by employees. The authors recommended: "Therefore, organizations should carefully
cultivate an ethical atmosphere that is sensitive to the pressures employees may feel to game the budget
through actions that involve cheating and/or manipulating earnings targets to maximize bonuses." [2]
The study concluded that requiring organizational ethics training that includes role playing helps teach
ethical behavior in budgeting and other areas of business. Ethics training never goes out so style.

Evaluating the expenses on a flexible budget computed for the number of units sold would provide an
indication of management's ability to control expenses. As shown in Figure 7.28, some expenses have a
favorable variance, while others have an unfavorable variance. This type of variance analysis provides more
information to evaluate management and help prepare the next year's budget. For example, the direct labor
in the flexible budget comparison shows an unfavorable variance, meaning the direct labor expense was more
than budgeted for the production of 1,400 units. When comparing direct labor expense, the direct labor in the
static budget mentioned earlier was even larger because it computed direct labor required to manufacture
1,500 units. It is not surprising that the static budget variance is favorable because 100 fewer units were
actually produced. However, that information is not as useful as the unfavorable variance when comparing
1,400 units produced versus the budgeted direct labor for 1,400 units used.

Figure 7.28 Actual versus Flexible Budget for Big Bad Bikes. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

2 Kenton B. Walker, et al. "Toeing the Line: The Ethics of Manipulating Budgets and Earnings." Management Accounting Quarterly 14, no. 3
(Spring 2013). https://www.imanet.org/-/media/f4869589d9d444de8c211d245a0192ff.ashx
382                                                                               Chapter 7 Budgeting

     THINK IT THROUGH

     A Budget for a New Business

     You are beginning your own business and developed a budget based on modest sales and expense
     assumptions. The actual results are very close to the budget at the end of the first and second months.
     During the third month, both cash collected and paid differ significantly from the budget. What could be
     the cause and what should you do?

     LINK TO LEARNING

     Budgeting is only the beginning of the process. Evaluating the results to determine if the financial goals
     are being met can make the difference in whether an organization or individual meets its goals or not.
     Forbes recognizes that budgeting is an important personal task that should start early in one's
     professional career. This article provides some custom budgeting guidelines for young adults
     (https://openstax.org/l/50BudgetGuide) to help.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 7 Budgeting  383

     Key Terms

budget quantitative plan estimating when and how much cash or other resources will be received and how
     the cash or other resources will be used

budgeted balance sheet estimated assets, liabilities, and equities that the company would have at the end
     of the year if their performance were to meet its expectations

budgeted income statement statement similar to a traditional income statement except it contains
     budgeted data

capital asset budget budget showing the organization's plans to invest in long-term assets
cash budget combined budget of all cash inflows and outflows of the organization
cash collections schedule schedule showing when cash will be received from customers
cash payments schedule schedule showing when cash will be used to pay for direct material purchases
direct labor budget budget based on the production budget used to ensure the proper amount of staff is

     available for production and that there is money available to pay for the labor
direct materials budget budget combining the production budget with the direct material per unit to

     ensure the proper quantity of direct materials is available when needed for production
financial budget category of budgeting that details estimates for cash inflows and outflows through

     planned operations and changes capital investments of assets, liabilities, and equities
flexible budget budget based on different levels of activity
manufacturing overhead budget budget including the remainder of the production costs not covered by

     the direct materials and direct labor budgets
master budget overall budget that includes the operating and financial budgets
operating budget category of budgeting that helps managers plan and manage production, order

     materials, schedule direct labor, and monitor overhead expenses
production budget budget showing the number of units that need to be produced for each period based on

     sales estimates and required inventory levels
rolling budget budget that is continuously updated by adding an additional budget period at the end of the

     current budget period
sales budget budget showing the expected sales in units and the sales price for the budget period
selling and administrative expense budget budget showing the variable and fixed expenses estimated to

     be incurred in all areas other than production
static budget budget prepared for a single level of activity for a given period
zero-based budgeting budget that begins with zero dollars and then includes in the budget only revenue

     and expenses that can be supported or justified

     Summary

7.1 Describe How and Why Managers Use Budgets
  · A good budgeting system assists management in reaching their goals through the planning and control
      of cash inflows through revenue and financing and outflows through payment and expenses.
  · There are various budgeting strategies including bottom-up, top-down, and zero-based budgeting.
  · A static budget is prepared at one level of activity, while a flexible budget allows the variable expenses to
      be adjusted for various levels of activity.
  · A master budget includes the subcategories of operating budgets and financial budgets.
  · A master budget is developed at the estimated level of activity.
384                                                                               Chapter 7 Budgeting

7.2 Prepare Operating Budgets
  · The sales budget is the first budget developed, and the estimated sales in turn guide the production
      budget.
  · The production budget shows the quantity of goods produced for each time period and leads to
      computing when and how much direct material needs to be ordered, when and how much labor needs to
      be scheduled, and when and how much manufacturing overhead needs to be planned.
  · The sales and administrative budget plans for the nonmanufacturing expenses.
  · All operating budgets combine to develop the budgeted income statement.

7.3 Prepare Financial Budgets
  · The financial budgets include the capital asset budget and the cash budget. The cash collections schedule
      and cash payments schedule are computed and combined with the other budgets to develop the cash
      budget.
  · Information from the other budgets and the budgeted income statement are used to develop the
      budgeted balance sheet.

7.4 Prepare Flexible Budgets
  · A master budget and related budgets are prepared as static budgets for the estimated level of activity.
  · A flexible budget adjusts the budgets for various levels of activity and allows for the actual results to be
      evaluated at the actual volume of activity.

7.5 Explain How Budgets Are Used to Evaluate Goals
  · Management's evaluations of the actual results versus the estimated budgetary results help plan for the
      future.
  · Favorable variances occur when sales are higher or expenses are lower than budgeted.
  · Unfavorable variances occur when sales are lower or expenses are higher than budgeted.

     Multiple Choice

1. 7.1 Which of the following is not a part of budgeting?
    A. planning
    B. finding bottlenecks
    C. providing performance evaluations
    D. preventing net operating losses

2. 7.1 Which of the following is an operating budget?
    A. cash budget
    B. production budget
    C. tax budget
    D. capital budget

3. 7.1 Which of the following is a finance budget?
    A. cash budget
    B. production budget
    C. direct materials purchasing budget
    D. tax budget

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 7 Budgeting                                                                      385

4. 7.1 Which approach is most likely to result in employee buy-in to the budget?
    A. top-down approach
    B. bottom-up approach
    C. total participation approach
    D. basing the budget on the prior year

5. 7.1 Which approach requires management to justify all its expenditures?
    A. bottom-up approach
    B. zero-based budgeting
    C. master budgeting
    D. capital allocation budgeting

6. 7.1 Which of the following is true in a bottom-up budgeting approach?
    A. Every expense needs to be justified.
    B. Supervisors tell departments their budget amount and the departments are free to work within those
          amounts.
    C. Departments budget their needs however they see fit.
    D. Departments determine their needs and relate them to the overall goals.

7. 7.1 The most common budget is prepared for a ________.
    A. week
    B. month
    C. quarter
    D. year

8. 7.2 Which of the operating budgets is prepared first?
    A. production budget
    B. sales budget
    C. cash received budget
    D. cash payments budget

9. 7.2 The direct materials budget is prepared using which budget's information?
    A. cash payments budget
    B. cash receipts budget
    C. production budget
    D. raw materials budget

10.     7.2 Which of the following is not an operating budget?
    A.  sales budget
    B.  production budget
    C.  direct labor budget
    D.  cash budget

11.     7.2 Which of the following statements is not correct?
    A.  The sales budget is computed by multiplying estimated sales by the sales price.
    B.  The production budget begins with the sales estimated for each period.
    C.  The direct materials budget begins with the sales estimated for each period.
    D.  The sales budget is typically the first budget prepared.
386                                                                                            Chapter 7 Budgeting

12.     7.2 The units required in production each period are computed by which of the following methods?
    A.  adding budgeted sales to the desired ending inventory and subtracting beginning inventory
    B.  adding beginning inventory, budgeted sales, and desired ending inventory
    C.  adding beginning inventory to budgeted sales and subtracting desired ending inventory
    D.  adding budgeted sales to the beginning inventory and subtracting the desired ending inventory.

13.     7.3 The cash budget is part of which category of budgets?
    A.  sales budget
    B.  cash payments budget
    C.  finance budget
    D.  operating budget

14.     7.3 Which is not a section of the cash budget?
    A.  cash receipts
    B.  cash disbursements
    C.  allowance for uncollectible accounts
    D.  financing needs

15.     7.3 Which budget is the starting point in preparing financial budgets?
    A.  the budgeted income statement
    B.  the budgeted balance sheet
    C.  the capital expense budget
    D.  the cash receipts budget

16.     7.3 Which of the following includes only financial budgets?
    A.  capital asset budget, budgeted income statement, sales budget
    B.  production budget, capital asset budget, budgeted balance sheet
    C.  cash budget, budgeted balance sheet, capital asset budget
    D.  budgeted income statement, direct material purchases budget, cash budget

17.     7.4 Which budget evaluates the results of operations at the actual level of activity?
    A.  capital budget
    B.  cash budget
    C.  flexible budget
    D.  static budget

18.     7.4 What is the main difference between static and flexible budgets?
    A.  The fixed manufacturing overhead is adjusted for units sold in the flexible budget.
    B.  The variable manufacturing overhead is adjusted in the static budget.
    C.  There is no difference between the budgets.
    D.  The variable costs are adjusted in a flexible budget.

     Questions

1. 7.1 What is a budget and what are the different types of budgets?
2. 7.1 What is the difference between budgeting and long-range planning?
3. 7.1 What are the advantages and disadvantages of the bottom-up budgeting approach?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 7 Budgeting  387

4. 7.1 Why might a rolling budget require more management participation than an annual budget?

5. 7.2 What information is necessary for the operating budgets?

6. 7.2 What operating budget exists for manufacturing but not for a retail company?

7. 7.3 What is the process for developing a budgeted balance sheet?

8. 7.3 Which of the financial budgets is the most important? Why?

9. 7.4 A company has prepared the operating budget and the cash budget. It is now preparing the
budgeted balance sheet. Identify the document that contains each of these balances.

    A. cash
    B. accounts receivable
    C. finished goods inventory
    D. accounts payable
    E. equipment purchases

10. 7.4 Fill in the blanks: A flexible budget summarizes _______ and _______ for various volume levels by
adjusting the _______ costs for the various levels of activities. The _______ costs remain the same for all levels of
activities.

11. 7.4 What information is included in the capital asset budget?

12. 7.5 Why does budget planning typically begin with the sales forecast?

13. 7.5 What steps should be considered if a budget is to be set and later have its results evaluated?

     Exercise Set A

EA1. 7.2 Blue Book printing is budgeting sales of 25,000 units and already has 5,000 in beginning inventory.
How many units must be produced to also meet the 7,000 units required in ending inventory?

EA2. 7.2 How many units are in beginning inventory if 32,000 units are budgeted for sales, 35,000 units are
produced, and the desired ending inventory is 9,000 units?

EA3. 7.2 Navigator sells GPS trackers for $50 each. It expects sales of 5,000 units in quarter 1 and a 5%
increase each subsequent quarter for the next 8 quarters. Prepare a sales budget by quarter for the first year.

EA4. 7.2 One Device makes universal remote controls and expects to sell 500 units in January, 800 in
February, 450 in March, 550 in April, and 600 in May. The required ending inventory is 20% of the next month's
sales. Prepare a production budget for the first four months of the year.

EA5. 7.2 Sunrise Poles manufactures hiking poles and is planning on producing 4,000 units in March and
3,700 in April. Each pole requires a half pound of material, which costs $1.20 per pound. The company's policy
is to have enough material on hand to equal 10% of the next month's production needs and to maintain a
finished goods inventory equal to 25% of the next month's production needs. What is the budgeted cost of
purchases for March?
388  Chapter 7 Budgeting

EA6. 7.2 Given the following information from Rowdy Enterprises' direct materials budget, how much direct
materials needs to be purchased?

EA7. 7.2 Each unit requires direct labor of 2.2 hours. The labor rate is $11.50 per hour and next year's direct
labor budget totals $834,900. How many units are included in the production budget for next year?
EA8. 7.2 How many units are estimated to be sold if Skyline, Inc., has a planned production of 900,000 units,
a desired beginning inventory of 160,000 units, and a desired ending inventory of 100,000 units?
EA9. 7.3 Cash collections for Wax On Candles found that 60% of sales were collected in the month of the
sale, 30% was collected the month after the sale, and 10% was collected the second month after the sale. Given
the sales shown, how much cash will be collected in January and February?

EA10. 7.3 Nonna's Re-Appliance Store collects 55% of its accounts receivable in the month of sale and 40%
in the month after the sale. Given the following sales, how much cash will be collected in February?

EA11. 7.3 Dream Big Pillow Co. pays 65% of its purchases in the month of purchase, 30% the month after
the purchase, and 5% in the second month following the purchase. It made the following purchases at the end
of 2017 and the beginning of 2018:

EA12. 7.3 Desiccate purchases direct materials each month. Its payment history shows that 70% is paid in
the month of purchase with the remaining balance paid the month after purchase. Prepare a cash payment
schedule for March if in January through March, it purchased $35,000, $37,000, and $39,000, respectively.
EA13. 7.3 What is the amount of budgeted cash payments if purchases are budgeted for $420,000 and the
beginning and ending balances of accounts payable are $95,000 and $92,000, respectively?
EA14. 7.3 Halifax Shoes has 30% of its sales in cash and the remainder on credit. Of the credit sales, 65% is
collected in the month of sale, 25% is collected the month after the sale, and 5% is collected the second month
after the sale. How much cash will be collected in August if sales are estimated as $75,000 in June, $65,000 in
July, and $90,000 in August?
EA15. 7.4 Cold X, Inc. uses this information when preparing their flexible budget: direct materials of $2 per
unit, direct labor of $3 per unit, and manufacturing overhead of $1 per unit. Fixed costs are $35,000. What
would be the budgeted amounts for 20,000 and 25,000 units?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 7 Budgeting                                                                                     389

EA16. 7.4 Using the provided budgeted information for production of 10,000 and 15,000 units, prepare a
flexible budget for 17,000 units.

EA17. 7.5 The production cost for a waterproof phone case is $7 per unit and fixed costs are $23,000 per
month. How much is the favorable or unfavorable variance if 5,500 units were produced for a total of $61,000?

  B Exercise Set B

EB1. 7.2 Lovely Wedding printing is budgeting sales of 32,000 units and already has 4,000 in beginning
inventory. How many units must be produced to also meet the 6,000 units required in ending inventory?

EB2. 7.2 How many units are in beginning inventory if 32,000 units are budgeted for sales, 35,000 units are
produced, and the desired ending inventory is 9,000 units?

EB3. 7.2 Barnstormer sells airplane accessories for $20 each. It expects sales of 120,000 units in quarter 1
and a 7% increase each subsequent quarter for the next 8 quarters. Prepare a sales budget by quarter for the
first year.

EB4. 7.2 Rehydrator makes a nutrition additive and expects to sell 3,000 units in January, 2,000 in February,
2,500 in March, 2,700 in April, and 2,900 in May. The required ending inventory is 20% of the next month's
sales, and the beginning inventory on January 1 was 600 units. Prepare a production budget for the first four
months of the year.

EB5. 7.2 Cloud Shoes manufactures recovery sandals and is planning on producing 12,000 units in March
and 11,500 in April. Each sandal requires 1.2 yards if material, which costs $3.00 per yard. The company's policy
is to have enough material on hand to equal 15% of next month's production needs and to maintain a finished
goods inventory equal to 20% of the next month's production needs. What is the budgeted cost of purchases
for March?

EB6. 7.2 Given the following information from Power Enterprises' direct materials budget, how much direct
materials needs to be purchased?

EB7. 7.2 Each unit requires direct labor of 4.1 hours. The labor rate is $13.75 per hour and next year's
production is estimated at 75,000 units. What is the amount to be included in next year's direct labor budget?

EB8. 7.2 How many units are estimated to be sold if Kino, Inc., has planned production of 750,000 units, a
desired beginning inventory of 30,000 units, and a desired ending inventory of 45,000 units?
390  Chapter 7 Budgeting

EB9. 7.3 Cash collections for Renew Lights found that 65% of sales were collected in the month of sale, 25%
was collected the month after the sale, and 10% was collected the second month after the sale. Given the sales
shown, how much cash will be collected in March and April?

EB10. 7.3 My Aunt's Closet Store collects 60% of its accounts receivable in the month of sale and 35% in the
month after the sale. Given the following sales, how much cash will be collected in March?

EB11. 7.3 Gear Up Co. pays 65% of its purchases in the month of purchase, 30% in the month after the
purchase, and 5% in the second month following the purchase. What are the cash payments if it made the
following purchases in 2018?

EB12. 7.3 Drainee purchases direct materials each month. Its payment history shows that 65% is paid in the
month of purchase with the remaining balance paid the month after purchase. Prepare a cash payment
schedule for January using this data: in December through February, it purchased $22,000, $25,000, and
$23,000 respectively.

EB13. 7.3 What is the amount of budgeted cash payments if purchases are budgeted for $190,500 and the
beginning and ending balances of accounts payable are $21,000 and $25,000, respectively?

EB14. 7.3 Earthie's Shoes has 55% of its sales in cash and the remainder on credit. Of the credit sales, 70%
is collected in the month of sale, 15% is collected the month after the sale, and 10% is collected the second
month after the sale. How much cash will be collected in June if sales are estimated as $75,000 in April, $65,000
in May, and $90,000 in June?

EB15. 7.4 Judge's Gavel uses this information when preparing their flexible budget: direct materials of $3
per unit, direct labor of $2.50 per unit, and manufacturing overhead of $1.25 per unit. Fixed costs are $49,000.
What would be the budgeted amounts for 33,000 and 35,000 units?

EB16. 7.4 Using the following budgeted information for production of 5,000 and 12,000 units, prepare a
flexible budget for 9,000 units.

EB17. 7.5 The production cost for UV protective sunglasses is $5.50 per unit and fixed costs are $19,400 per
month. How much is the favorable or unfavorable variance if 14,000 units were produced for a total of
$97,000?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 7 Budgeting                                                                     391

     Problem Set A

PA1. 7.2 Lens Junction sells lenses for $45 each and is estimating sales of 15,000 units in January and 18,000
in February. Each lens consists of 2 pounds of silicon costing $2.50 per pound, 3 oz of solution costing $3 per
ounce, and 30 minutes of direct labor at a labor rate of $18 per hour. Desired inventory levels are:

Prepare a sales budget, production budget, direct materials budget for silicon and solution, and a direct labor
budget.

PA2. 7.2 The data shown were obtained from the financial records of Italian Exports, Inc., for March:

Sales are expected to increase each month by 10%. Prepare a budgeted income statement.
392                                                                                          Chapter 7 Budgeting

PA3. 7.2 Echo Amplifiers prepared the following sales budget for the first quarter of 2018:

It also has this additional information related to its expenses:

Prepare a sales and administrative expense budget for each month in the quarter ending March 31, 2018.
PA4. 7.2 Prepare a budgeted income statement using the information shown.

PA5. 7.2 Spree Party Lights overhead expenses are:

Prepare a manufacturing overhead budget if the number of units to produce for January, February, and March
are 2,500, 3,000, and 2,700, respectively.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 7 Budgeting                                                                                           393

PA6. 7.3 Relevant data from the Poster Company's operating budgets are:

Additional data: Capital assets were sold in January for $10,000 and $4,500 in May. Dividends of $4,500 were
paid in February. The beginning cash balance was $60,359 and a required minimum cash balance is $59,000.
Use this information to prepare a cash budget for the first two quarters of the year
394                                                                               Chapter 7 Budgeting

PA7. 7.3 Fill in the missing information from the following schedules:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 7 Budgeting                                                                                            395

PA8. 7.3 Direct labor hours are estimated as 2,000 in Quarter 1; 2,100 in Quarter 2; 1,900 in Quarter 3; and
2,300 in Quarter 4. Prepare a manufacturing overhead budget using the information provided.

PA9. 7.3 Fitbands' estimated sales are:

What are the balances in accounts receivable for January, February, and March if 65% of sales is collected in
the month of sale, 25% is collected the month after the sale, and 10% is second month after the sale?

PA10. 7.3 Sports Socks has a policy of always paying within the discount period and each of its suppliers
provides a discount of 2% if paid within 10 days of purchase. Because of the purchase policy, 85% of its
payments are made in the month of purchase and 15% are made the following month. The direct materials
budget provides for purchases of $129,582 in November, $294,872 in December, $239,582 in January, and
$234,837 in February. What is the balance in accounts payable for January 31, and February 28?

PA11. 7.4 Prepare a flexible budgeted income for 120,000 units using the following information from a
static budget for 100,000 units:
396  Chapter 7 Budgeting

PA12. 7.4 Before the year began, the following static budget was developed for the estimated sales of
100,000. Sales are sluggish and management needs to revise its budget. Use this information to prepare a
flexible budget for 80,000 and 90,000 units of sales.

PA13. 7.4 Caribbean Hammocks currently sells 75,000 units at $50 per unit. Its expenses are:

Management believes it can increase sales by 5,000 units for every $5 decrease in sales price. It also believes
the additional sales will allow a decrease in direct material of $1 for each additional 5,000 units. Prepare a
flexible budgeted income statement for 75,000-, 80,000-, and 85,000-unit sales.
PA14. 7.4 Total Pop's data show the following information:

New machinery will be added in April. This machine will reduce the labor required per unit and increase the
labor rate for those employees qualified to operate the machinery. Finished goods inventory is required to be
20% of the next month's requirements. Direct material requires 2 pounds per unit at a cost of $3 per pound.
The ending inventory required for direct materials is 15% of the next month's needs. In January, the beginning
inventory is 3,000 units of finished goods and 4,470 pounds of material. Prepare a production budget, direct
materials budget, and direct labor budget for the first quarter of the year.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 7 Budgeting                                                                                    397

PA15. 7.4 Identify the document that contains the information listed in these lines from the budgeted
balance sheet shown.

    A. Cash
    B. Accounts receivable
    C. Raw materials inventory
    D. Computers
    E. Accounts payable

PA16. 7.5 Titanium Blades refines titanium for use in all brands of razor blades. It prepared a static budget
for the sales of 5,000 units. These variances were observed:

Determine the static budget and use the information to prepare a flexible budget and analysis for the 6,000
units actually sold.
398  Chapter 7 Budgeting

  B Problem Set B

PB1. 7.2 Lens & Shades sells sunglasses for $37 each and is estimating sales of 21,000 units in January and
19,000 in February. Each lens consists of 2.00 mm of plastic costing $2.50 per mm, 1.7 oz of dye costing $2.80
per ounce, and 0.50 hours direct labor at a labor rate of $18 per unit. Desired inventory levels are:

Prepare a sales budget, production budget, direct materials budget for silicon and solution, and a direct labor
budget.

PB2. 7.2 The following data were obtained from the financial records of Sonicbrush, Inc., for March:

Sales are expected to increase each month by 15%. Prepare a budgeted income statement.
PB3. 7.2 TIB makes custom guitars and prepared the following sales budget for the second quarter

It also has this additional information related to its expenses:
Direct material per unit $55, Direct labor per hour 20, Variable manufacturing overhead per hour 3.50, Fixed
manufacturing overhead per month 3,000, Sales commissions per unit 20, Sales salaries per month 5,000,
Delivery expense per unit 0.50, Utilities per month 4,000, Administrative salaries per month 20,000, Marketing
expenses per month 8,000, Insurance expense per month 11,000, Depreciation expense per month 9,000.
Prepare a sales and administrative expense budget for each month in the quarter ended June 30, 2018.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 7 Budgeting                                                                                        399

PB4. 7.2 Prepare a budgeted income statement using the information shown.

PB5. 7.2 Sunshine Gardens overhead expenses are:

Given production of 10,200; 11,300; 12,900; and 13,200 for each quarter of the next year, prepare a
manufacturing overhead budget for each quarter.
PB6. 7.3 Relevant data from the operating budget of The Framers are:

Other data:

      · Capital assets were sold in quarter 1 and $8,000 was collected in quarter 1 and $500 collected in
          quarter 2.

      · Dividends of $500 will be paid in May
      · The beginning cash balance was $50,000 and a required minimum cash balance is $10,000.
      · Prepare a cash budget for the first two quarters of the year.
400                                                                     Chapter 7 Budgeting

PB7. 7.3 Fill in the missing information from the following schedules:

PB8. 7.3 Mesa Aquatics, Inc. estimated direct labor hours as 1,900 in quarter 1, 2,000 in quarter 2, 2,200 in
quarter 3, and 1,800 in quarter 4. a sales and administration budget using the information provided.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 7 Budgeting                              401

PB9. 7.3 Amusement tickets estimated sales are:

What are the balances in accounts receivable for April, May, and June if 60% of sales are collected in the month
of sale, 30% are collected the month after the sale, and 10% are collected the second month after the sale?

PB10. 7.3 All Temps has a policy of always paying within the discount period, and each of its suppliers
provides a discount of 2% if paid within 10 days of purchase. Because of the purchase policy, 80% of its
payments are made in the month of purchase and 20% are made the following month. The direct materials
budget provides for purchases of $23,812 in February, $23,127 in March, $21,836 in April, and $28,173 in May.
What is the balance in accounts payable for April 30, and May 31?

PB11. 7.4 Prepare a flexible budgeted income statement for 47,000 units using the following information
from a static budget for 45,000 units:

PB12. 7.4 Before the year began, the following static budget was developed for the estimated sales of
50,000. Sales are higher than expected and management needs to revise its budget. Prepare a flexible budget
for 100,000 and 110,000 units of sales.
402                                                                               Chapter 7 Budgeting

PB13. 7.4 Artic Camping Gear's currently sells 35,000 units at $73 per unit. Its expenses are as follows:

Management believes it can increase sales by 2,000 units for every $5 decrease in sales price. It also believes
the additional sales will allow a decrease in direct material of $1 for each additional 2,000 units. Prepare a
flexible budgeted income statement for 35,000-, 37,000-, and 39,000-unit sales.
PB14. 7.4 Fruit Tea's data show the following information:

New machinery will be added in October. This machine will reduce the labor required per unit and increase the
labor rate for those employees qualified to operate the machinery. Finished goods inventory is required to be
20% of the next month's requirements. Direct material requires 2.5 pounds per unit at a cost of $5 per pound.
The ending inventory required for direct materials is 20% of the next month's needs. In August, the beginning
inventory is 3,750 units of finished goods and 13,125 pounds of materials. Prepare a production budget, direct
materials budget, and direct labor budget for the first quarter of the year.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 7 Budgeting                                                                                          403

PB15. 7.4 Identify the document that contains the information listed in these lines from the budgeted
balance sheet shown.

    A. Accounts receivable
    B. Finished goods inventory
    C. Machinery
    D. Accumulated depreciation
    E. Notes payable
    F. Common stock

PB16. 7.5 Replenish sells shampoo that removes chlorine from hair. It prepared a static budget for the
sales of 10,000 units. These variances were observed:

Determine the static budget and use the information to prepare a flexible budget and analysis for the 8,000
units actually sold.

     Thought Provokers

TP1. 7.1 Why is a clear understanding of management's goals and objectives necessary for effective
budgets?
404                                                                               Chapter 7 Budgeting

TP2. 7.1 It is proper budgeting procedure to begin with estimated revenues, but why might some nonprofit
entities begin planning their expenditures instead of their revenues?

TP3. 7.2 How would a human resources department use information in the operating budgets?

TP4. 7.2 How would maintenance departments use information in the budget?

TP5. 7.2 How might service industries predict revenue?

TP6. 7.4 The management of Hess, Inc., is developing a flexible budget for the upcoming year. It was not
pleased with the small amount of net income the budget showed at all sales levels and is contemplating using
a less expensive material. This action reduces direct material cost by $1 per unit. What would be the effects on
financial statements and a flexible budget if management takes this approach? Are there other factors that
need to be considered?

TP7. 7.4 When would a static budget be effective in evaluating a manager's performance?

TP8. 7.5 If management is being evaluated on their ability to manage a budget, what can they do to
increase cash flow?

TP9. 7.5 If management is being evaluated on their ability to manage a budget, what can they do to
decrease cash outflow?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
     8

              Standard Costs and Variances

Figure 8.1 Coffee Shop. How do they know what each cup of coffee, muffin, or bagel costs so they can
determine what price to charge? (credit: modification of "Bakery Coffee" by "veerasantinithi"/Pixabay, CC0)

 Chapter Outline

  8.1 Explain How and Why a Standard Cost Is Developed
  8.2 Compute and Evaluate Materials Variances
  8.3 Compute and Evaluate Labor Variances
  8.4 Compute and Evaluate Overhead Variances
  8.5 Describe How Companies Use Variance Analysis

      Why It Matters

   Sam saw how much coffee his fellow students were drinking and decided to open a student-run coffee shop
   on campus. Sam knew that developing a plan for the coffee shop would help make the shop successful. He
   researched what types of coffee to offer, the hours the shop would be open, and the number of employees
   needed, by researching other coffee shops near campus. He brewed coffee to determine the cost of the coffee
   and the time it took to brew. He also served several friends to determine how long it would take to serve
   customers. He observed, in other coffee shops, how much cream and other additives are used by customers.
   He talked to several coffee suppliers for prices of his various materials. He looked at empty stores near
   campus to determine what his rent would be. Now that he has this information, he is not sure how to make it
   useful to him. How could he use this information to plan and control the operations of the shop? One
   calculation he can do is determine his standard costs.
   What is the difference between a budget and a standard? A budget usually refers to a company's projections
   for costs, revenues, and cash flows associated with the overall operations of the organization, or a subsection
   of the corporation such as a division. A standard usually refers to a company's projected costs for a single unit
406                                                                               Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances

of a product or service and includes the expected, or standard, cost for the various cost components of each
unit, such as materials, labor, and overhead.

 8.1 Explain How and Why a Standard Cost Is Developed

A syllabus is one way an instructor can communicate expectations to students. Students can use the syllabus
to plan their studying to maximize their grade and to coordinate the amount and timing of studying for each
course. Knowing what is expected, and when it is expected, allows for better plans and performance. When
your performance does not match your expectations, a variance arises--a difference between the standard
and the actual performance. You then need to determine why the difference occurred. You want to know why
you did not receive the grade you expected so you can make adjustments for the next assignment to earn a
better grade.
Companies operate in a similar manner. They have an expectation, or standard, for production. For example,
if a company is producing tables, it might establish standards for such components as the amount of board
feet of lumber expected to be used in producing each table or the number of hours of direct labor hours it
expected to use in the table's production. These standards can then be used in establishing standard costs
that can be used in creating an assortment of different types of budgets.
When a variance occurs in its standards, the company investigates to determine the causes, so they can
perform better in the future. For example, General Motors has standards for each item on a vehicle. It can
determine the cost and selling price of a power antenna by knowing the standard material cost for the
antenna and the standard labor cost of adding the antenna to the vehicle. General Motors also can add up all
of the standard times for all vehicles it makes to determine if too much or too little labor was used in
production.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Developing standards is a complicated and costly process. Review this article on how to develop a
   standard cost system (https://openstax.org/l/50StandardCost) for more details.

Fundamentals of Standard Costs

It is important to establish standards for cost at the beginning of a period to prepare the budget; manage
material, labor, and overhead costs; and create a reasonable sales price for a good. A standard cost is an
expected cost that a company usually establishes at the beginning of a fiscal year for prices paid and amounts
used. The standard cost is an expected amount paid for materials costs or labor rates. The standard quantity is
the expected usage amount of materials or labor. A standard cost may be determined by past history or
industry norms. The company can then compare the standard costs against its actual results to measure its
efficiency. Sometimes when comparing standard costs against actual results, there is a difference.

This difference can be attributed to many reasons. For example, the coffee company mentioned in the opening
vignette may expect to pay $0.50 per ounce for coffee grounds. After the company purchased the coffee
grounds, it discovered it paid $0.60 per ounce. This variance would need to be accounted for, and possible
operational changes would occur as a result. Cost accounting systems become more useful to management
when they include budgeted amounts to serve as a point of comparison with actual results.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances                                                                      407

Many departments help determine standard cost. Product design, in conjunction with production, purchasing,
and sales, determines what the product will look like and what materials will be used. Production works with
purchasing to determine what material will work best in production and will be the most cost efficient. Sales
will also help decide the material in terms of customer demand. Production will work with personnel to
determine labor costs for the product, which is based on how long it will take to make the product, which
departments will be involved, and what type and number of employees it will take.

Consider how many different materials can go into a product. For example, there are approximately 14,000
parts that comprise the average automobile. The manufacturer will set a standard price and a quantity used
per automobile for each part, and it will determine the labor required to install the part. At Fiat Chrysler
Automobiles' Belvidere Assembly Plant, for example, there are approximately 5,000 employees assembling
automobiles.[1] In addition to having standard costs associated with each part, each employee has standards
for the job he or she performs.

Standard costs are typically established for reasonably attainable levels of efficiency (production). They serve
as a target and are useful in motivating standard performance. An ideal standard level is set assuming that
everything is perfect, machines do not break down, employees show up on time, there are no defects, there is
no scrap, and materials are perfect. This level of standard is not the best motivator, because employees may
see this level as unattainable. For example, consider whether you would take a course if the letter grades were
as follows: an A is 99-100%, a B is 98-99%, a C is 97-98%, a D is 96-97%, and below 96% is an F. These
standards are unreasonable and unrealistic, and they would not motivate students to do well in the course.

At the other end of the spectrum, if the standards are too easy, there is little motivation to do better, and
products may not be properly built, may be built with inferior materials, or both. For example, consider how
you would handle the following grading scale for your course: an A is 50-100%, a B is 35-50%, a C is 10-35%, a
D is 2-10%, and below 2% is an F. Would you learn anything? Would you try very hard? The same
considerations come into play for employees with standards that are too easy.

Instead of these two extremes, a company would set an attainable standard, which is one that employees
can reach with reasonable effort. The standards are not so high that employees will not try to reach them and
not so low that they do not give any incentive for employees to achieve profitability.

In order for a company to establish its attainable standard cost for each product, it must consider the standard
costs for materials, labor, and overhead. The material standard cost consists of a standard price per unit of
material and a standard amount of material per unit. Returning to the opening vignette, let us say the coffee
shop is trying to establish the standard materials cost for one cup of regular coffee. To keep the example
simple, we are not incorporating the cost of water or the ceramic cup cost (since they are reused). Two
components for the cup of coffee will need to be considered:

 1. Price per ounce of coffee grounds
 2. Amount of coffee grounds (materials) used per cup of coffee

To determine the standards for labor, the coffee shop would need to consider two additional components:

 1. Labor rate per minute
 2. Amount of time to make one cup of regular coffee

To determine the standard for overhead, the coffee shop would first need to consider the fact that it has two
types of overhead as shown in Figure 8.2. Greater detail about the calculation of the variable and fixed
overhead is provided in Compute and Evaluate Overhead Variances.

1 "Belvidere Assembly Plant and Belvidere Satellite Stamping Plant." Fiat Chrysler Automobiles. June 2018.
http://media.fcanorthamerica.com/newsrelease.do?id=323&mid=1
408                                                            Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances

 1. Fixed overhead (does not change in total with production)
 2. Variable overhead (does change in total with production)
All of this information is entered on a standard cost card.

Figure 8.2 Standard Cost Card for a Coffee Shop. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Once a company determines a standard cost, they can then evaluate any variances. A variance is the difference
between a standard cost and actual performance. There are favorable and unfavorable variances. A favorable
variance involves spending less, or using less, than the anticipated or estimated standard. An unfavorable
variance involves spending more, or using more, than the anticipated or estimated standard. Before
determining whether the variance is favorable or unfavorable, it is often helpful for the company to determine
why the variance exists.

   YOUR TURN

   Developing a Standard Cost Card

   Use the information provided to create a standard cost card for production of one deluxe bicycle from
   Bicycles Unlimited.
   To make one bicycle it takes four pounds of material. The material can usually be purchased for $5.25 per
   pound. The labor necessary to build a bicycle consists of two types. The first type of labor is assembly,
   which takes 2.75 hours. These workers are paid $11.00 per hour. The second type of labor is finishing,
   which takes 4 hours. These workers are paid $15.00 per hour. Overhead is applied using labor hours. The
   variable overhead rate is $5.00 per labor hour. The fixed overhead rate is $3.00 per hour.
   Solution

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances  409

   ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

   Ethical Variance Analysis

   Variance analysis allows managers to see whether costs are different than planned. Once a difference
   between expected and actual costs is identified, variance analysis should delve into why the costs differ
   and what the magnitude of the difference means. To determine why a cost differs, it should be
   established if the additional cost provides a benefit or detriment to an organization's stakeholders, the
   people or entities that are affected by the organization's actions or inactions. Not all stakeholders are
   equal in the analysis, but an organization should recognize each stakeholder's interest in the
   organization's business and operational decisions, while ranking the importance of the stakeholder in
   relation to any decision made.

   Ranking should look to how stakeholders are affected by costs and any decisions related to cost variance,
   or why the variance occurred. For example, if a cost variance is due to an additional cost to make a
   product eco-friendly, then an organization may determine that incurring the cost is a benefit to its
   stakeholders. However, if the additional cost creates an unfavorable situation for a stakeholder, the
   process incurring the cost should be investigated. Remember that the owners of a company, including
   shareholders, are also stakeholders. To determine the best course of action for an organization, cost
   analysis should help inform stakeholder analysis--the process of systematically gathering and analyzing
   all of the information related to a business decision.

Different factors may produce a variance. The company could have paid too much or too little for production.
It may have purchased the wrong grade of material or hired employees with more or less experience than
required. Sometimes the variances are interrelated. For example, purchasing substandard materials may lead
to using more time to make the product and may produce more scrap. The substandard material may have
been more difficult to work with or had more defects than the proper grade material. In such a situation, a
favorable material price variance could cause an unfavorable labor efficiency variance and an unfavorable
material quantity variance. Employees who do not have the expected experience level may save money in the
wage rate but may require more hours to be worked and more material to be used because of their
inexperience.

Another situation in which a variance may occur is when the cost of labor and/or material changes after the
410  Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances

standard was established. Toward the end of the fiscal year, standards often become less reliable because
time has passed and the environment has changed. It is not reasonable to expect the price of all materials and
labor to remain constant for 12 months. For example, the grade of material used to establish the standard
may no longer be available.

Manufacturing Cost Variances

As you've learned, the standard price and standard quantity are anticipated amounts. Any change from these
budgeted amounts will produce a variance. There can be variances for materials, labor, and overhead. Direct
materials may have a variance in price of materials or quantity of materials used. Direct labor may have a
variance in the rate paid to workers or the amount of time used to make a product. Overhead may produce a
variance in expected fixed or variable costs, leading to possible differences in production capacity and
management's ability to control overhead. More specifics on the formulas, processes, and interpretations of
the direct materials, direct labor, and overhead variances are discussed in each of this chapter's following
sections.

   CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

   Qualcomm[2]

   Qualcomm Inc. is a large producer of telecommunications equipment focusing mainly on wireless
   products and services. As with any company, Qualcomm sets labor standards and must address any
   variances in labor costs to stay on budget, and control overall manufacturing costs.
   In 2018, Qualcomm announced a reduction to its labor force, affecting many of its full-time and
   temporary workers. The reduction in labor was necessary to suppress rising expenses that could not be
   controlled through overhead or materials cost-cutting measures. The variances between standard labor
   rates and actual labor rates, and diminishing profit margins will have contributed to this decision. It is
   important for Qualcomm management to keep labor variances minimal in the future so that large
   workforce reductions are not required to control costs.

     THINK IT THROUGH

     Chocolate Cow Ice Cream Company

     The Chocolate Cow Ice Cream Company has grown substantially recently, and management now feels
     the need to develop standards and compute variances. A consulting firm was hired to develop the
     standards and the format for the variance computation. One standard in particular that the consulting
     firm developed seemed too excessive to plant management. The consulting firm's standard was
     production of 100 gallons of ice cream every 45 minutes. The plant's middle level of management
     thought the standard should be 100 gallons every 55 minutes, while the top management of the

2 Munsif Vengattil. "Qualcomm Begins Layoffs as Part of Cost Cuts." Reuters. April 18, 2018. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-qualcomm-layoffs/qualcomm-begins-
layoffs-as-part-of-cost-cuts-idUSKBN1HP33L

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances                                                                        411

company thought that the consulting firm's standard would provide more motivation to the employees.

 1. Why is the company establishing a standard for production?
 2. What are some factors the company may need to consider before selecting one of the proposed

      standards?

 8.2 Compute and Evaluate Materials Variances

As you've learned, direct materials are those materials used in the production of goods that are easily
traceable and are a major component of the product. The amount of materials used and the price paid for
those materials may differ from the standard costs determined at the beginning of a period. A company can
compute these materials variances and, from these calculations, can interpret the results and decide how to
address these differences.

   CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

   Buttering Popcorn

   In a movie theater, management uses standards to determine if the proper amount of butter is being
   used on the popcorn. They train the employees to put two tablespoons of butter on each bag of popcorn,
   so total butter usage is based on the number of bags of popcorn sold. Therefore, if the theater sells 300
   bags of popcorn with two tablespoons of butter on each, the total amount of butter that should be used
   is 600 tablespoons. Management can then compare the predicted use of 600 tablespoons of butter to the
   actual amount used. If the actual usage of butter was less than 600, customers may not be happy,
   because they may feel that they did not get enough butter. If more than 600 tablespoons of butter were
   used, management would investigate to determine why. Some reasons why more butter was used than
   expected (unfavorable outcome) would be because of inexperienced workers pouring too much, or the
   standard was set too low, producing unrealistic expectations that do not satisfy customers.

Fundamentals of Direct Materials Variances

The direct materials variances measure how efficient the company is at using materials as well as how
effective it is at using materials. There are two components to a direct materials variance, the direct
materials price variance and the direct materials quantity variance, which both compare the actual price or
amount used to the standard amount.

Direct Materials Price Variance

The direct materials price variance compares the actual price per unit (pound or yard, for example) of the
direct materials to the standard price per unit of direct materials. The formula for direct materials price
variance is calculated as:
412  Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances

Factoring out actual quantity used from both components of the formula, it can be rewritten as:

With either of these formulas, the actual quantity used refers to the actual amount of materials used to create
one unit of product. The standard price is the expected price paid for materials per unit. The actual price paid
is the actual amount paid for materials per unit. If there is no difference between the standard price and the
actual price paid, the outcome will be zero, and no price variance exists.
If the actual price paid per unit of material is lower than the standard price per unit, the variance will be a
favorable variance. A favorable outcome means you spent less on the purchase of materials than you
anticipated. If, however, the actual price paid per unit of material is greater than the standard price per unit,
the variance will be unfavorable. An unfavorable outcome means you spent more on the purchase of materials
than you anticipated.
The actual price can differ from the standard or expected price because of such factors as supply and demand
of the material, increased labor costs to the supplier that are passed along to the customer, or improvements
in technology that make the material cheaper. The producer must be aware that the difference between what
it expects to happen and what actually happens will affect all of the goods produced using these particular
materials. Therefore, the sooner management is aware of a problem, the sooner they can fix it. For that
reason, the material price variance is computed at the time of purchase and not when the material is used in
production.
Let us consider an example. Connie's Candy Company produces various types of candies that they sell to
retailers. Connie's Candy establishes a standard price for candy-making materials of $7.00 per pound. Each
box of candy is expected to use 0.25 pounds of candy-making materials. Connie's Candy found that the actual
price of materials was $6.00 per pound. They still actually use 0.25 pounds of materials to make each box. The
direct materials price variance computes as:

                Direct Materials Price Variance = ($6.00 - $7.00) × 0.25 lb. = $0.25 or $0.25 (Favorable)
In this case, the actual price per unit of materials is $6.00, the standard price per unit of materials is $7.00, and
the actual quantity used is 0.25 pounds. This computes as a favorable outcome. This is a favorable outcome
because the actual price for materials was less than the standard price. As a result of this favorable outcome
information, the company may consider continuing operations as they exist, or could change future budget
projections to reflect higher profit margins, among other things.
Let us take the same example except now the actual price for candy-making materials is $9.00 per pound. The
direct materials price variance computes as:

              Direct Materials Price Variance = ($9.00 - $7.00) × 0.25 lbs. = $0.50 or $0.50 (Unfavorable)
In this case, the actual price per unit of materials is $9.00, the standard price per unit of materials is $7.00, and
the actual quantity used is 0.25 pounds. This computes as an unfavorable outcome. This is an unfavorable
outcome because the actual price for materials was more than the standard price. As a result of this
unfavorable outcome information, the company may consider using cheaper materials, changing suppliers, or

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances                                                                       413

increasing prices to cover costs.
Another element this company and others must consider is a direct materials quantity variance.

   THINK IT THROUGH

   Don't "Skirt" the Issue

   You run a fabric store and order materials through a supplier. At the end of the month, you review your
   materials cost and discover that your direct materials price and quantity variances produced unfavorable
   results. What could be attributed to these unfavorable outcomes? How would these unfavorable
   outcomes impact the total direct materials variance?

Direct Materials Quantity Variance

The direct materials quantity variance compares the actual quantity of materials used to the standard
materials that were expected to be used to make the actual units produced. The variance is calculated using
this formula:

Factoring out standard price from both components of the formula, it can be rewritten as:

With either of these formulas, the actual quantity used refers to the actual amount of materials used at the
actual production output. The standard price is the expected price paid for materials per unit. The standard
quantity is the expected amount of materials used at the actual production output. If there is no difference
between the actual quantity used and the standard quantity, the outcome will be zero, and no variance exists.

If the actual quantity of materials used is less than the standard quantity used at the actual production output
level, the variance will be a favorable variance. A favorable outcome means you used fewer materials than
anticipated, to make the actual number of production units. If, however, the actual quantity of materials used
is greater than the standard quantity used at the actual production output level, the variance will be
unfavorable. An unfavorable outcome means you used more materials than anticipated to make the actual
number of production units.

The actual quantity used can differ from the standard quantity because of improved efficiencies in production,
carelessness or inefficiencies in production, or poor estimation when creating the standard usage.

Consider the previous example with Connie's Candy Company. Connie's Candy established a standard price
for candy-making materials of $7.00 per pound. Each box of candy is expected to use 0.25 pounds of candy-
making materials. Connie's Candy found that the actual quantity of candy-making materials used to produce
one box of candy was 0.20 per pound. The direct materials quantity variance computes as:
414  Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances

            Direct Materials Quantity Variance = (0.20 lb. - 0.25 lb.) × $7.00 = -$0.35 or $0.35 (Favorable)

In this case, the actual quantity of materials used is 0.20 pounds, the standard price per unit of materials is
$7.00, and the standard quantity used is 0.25 pounds. This computes as a favorable outcome. This is a
favorable outcome because the actual quantity of materials used was less than the standard quantity expected
at the actual production output level. As a result of this favorable outcome information, the company may
consider continuing operations as they exist, or could change future budget projections to reflect higher profit
margins, among other things.

Let us take the same example except now the actual quantity of candy-making materials used to produce one
box of candy was 0.50 per pound. The direct materials quantity variance computes as:

           Direct Materials Quantity Variance = (0.50 lb. - 0.25 lb.) × $7.00 = $1.75 or $1.75 (Unfavorable)

In this case, the actual quantity of materials used is 0.50 pounds, the standard price per unit of materials is
$7.00, and the standard quantity used is 0.25 pounds. This computes as an unfavorable outcome. This is an
unfavorable outcome because the actual quantity of materials used was more than the standard quantity
expected at the actual production output level. As a result of this unfavorable outcome information, the
company may consider retraining workers to reduce waste or change their production process to decrease
materials needs per box.

The combination of the two variances can produce one overall total direct materials cost variance.

     LINK TO LEARNING

     Watch this video featuring a professor of accounting walking through the steps involved in calculating a
     material price variance and a material quantity variance (https://openstax.org/l/50Variances) to learn
     more.

Total Direct Materials Cost Variance

When a company makes a product and compares the actual materials cost to the standard materials cost, the
result is the total direct materials cost variance.

An unfavorable outcome means the actual costs related to materials were more than the expected (standard)
costs. If the outcome is a favorable outcome, this means the actual costs related to materials are less than the
expected (standard) costs.
The total direct materials cost variance is also found by combining the direct materials price variance and the
direct materials quantity variance. By showing the total materials variance as the sum of the two components,
management can better analyze the two variances and enhance decision-making.
Figure 8.3 shows the connection between the direct materials price variance and direct materials quantity
variance to total direct materials cost variance.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances  415

Figure 8.3 Direct Materials Variance.
For example, Connie's Candy Company expects to pay $7.00 per pound for candy-making materials but
actually pays $9.00 per pound. The company expected to use 0.25 pounds of materials per box but actually
used 0.50 per box. The total direct materials variance is computed as:
 Total Direct Materials Variance = (0.50 lbs. × $9.00) - (0.25 lbs. × $7.00) = $4.50 - $1.75 = $2.75 (Unfavorable)
In this case, two elements contribute to the unfavorable outcome. Connie's Candy paid $2.00 per pound more
for materials than expected and used 0.25 pounds more of materials than expected to make one box of candy.
The same calculation is shown using the outcomes of the direct materials price and quantity variances.

As with the interpretations for the materials price and quantity variances, the company would review the
individual components contributing to the overall unfavorable outcome for the total direct materials variance,
and possibly make changes to production elements as a result.
416  Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances

     YOUR TURN

     Sweet and Fresh Shampoo Materials

     Biglow Company makes a hair shampoo called Sweet and Fresh. Each bottle has a standard material cost
     of 8 ounces at $0.85 per ounce. During May, Biglow manufactured 11,000 bottles. They bought 89,000
     ounces of material at a cost of $74,760. All 89,000 ounces were used to make the 11,000 bottles. Calculate
     the material price variance and the material quantity variance.
     Solution
     Actual price per pound: 74,760/89,000 = $0.84
     Material price variance: 89,000 × (0.84 - 0.85) = $890 favorable
     Material quantity variance: 0.85 × (89,000 - 88,000) = $850 unfavorable

 8.3 Compute and Evaluate Labor Variances

In addition to evaluating materials usage, companies must assess how efficiently and effectively they are using
labor in the production of their products. Direct labor is a cost associated with workers working directly in the
production process. The company must look at both the quantity of hours used and the rate of the labor and
compare outcomes to standard costs. Determining efficiency and effectiveness of labor leads to individual
labor variances. A company can compute these labor variances and make informed decisions about labor
operations based on these differences.

Fundamentals of Direct Labor Variances

The direct labor variance measures how efficiently the company uses labor as well as how effective it is at
pricing labor. There are two components to a labor variance, the direct labor rate variance and the direct labor
time variance.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances                                                                                      417

Direct Labor Rate Variance

The direct labor rate variance compares the actual rate per hour of direct labor to the standard rate per hour
of labor for the hours worked. The direct labor rate variance is calculated using this formula:

Factoring out the actual hours worked from both components of the formula, it can be rewritten as

With either of these formulas, the actual rate per hour refers to the actual rate of pay for workers to create one
unit of product. The standard rate per hour is the expected rate of pay for workers to create one unit of
product. The actual hours worked are the actual number of hours worked to create one unit of product. If
there is no difference between the standard rate and the actual rate, the outcome will be zero, and no variance
exists.

If the actual rate of pay per hour is less than the standard rate of pay per hour, the variance will be a favorable
variance. A favorable outcome means you paid workers less than anticipated. If, however, the actual rate of
pay per hour is greater than the standard rate of pay per hour, the variance will be unfavorable. An
unfavorable outcome means you paid workers more than anticipated.

The actual rate can differ from the standard or expected rate because of supply and demand of the workers,
increased labor costs due to economic changes or union contracts, or the ability to hire employees at a
different skill level. Once the manufacturer makes the products, the labor costs will follow the goods through
production, so the company should evaluate how the difference between what it expected to happen and what
actually happened will affect all the goods produced using these particular labor rates.

Let us again consider Connie's Candy Company with respect to labor. Connie's Candy establishes a standard
rate per hour for labor of $8.00. Each box of candy is expected to require 0.10 hours of labor (6 minutes).
Connie's Candy found that the actual rate of pay per hour for labor was $7.50. They still actually required 0.10
hours of labor to make each box. The direct labor rate variance computes as:

               Direct Labor Rate Variance = ($7.50 - $8.00) × 0.10 hours = - $0.05 or $0.05 Favorable

In this case, the actual rate per hour is $7.50, the standard rate per hour is $8.00, and the actual hour worked is
0.10 hours per box. This computes as a favorable outcome. This is a favorable outcome because the actual rate
of pay was less than the standard rate of pay. As a result of this favorable outcome information, the company
may consider continuing operations as they exist, or could change future budget projections to reflect higher
profit margins, among other things.

Let us take the same example except now the actual rate of pay per hour is $9.50. The direct labor rate
variance computes as:

Direct  Labor  Rate                     Variance  =  ($9.50  -  $8.00)  ×  0.10  hours  =  $0.15  or  $0.15  Unfavorable  
                                                                                                                          

In this case, the actual rate per hour is $9.50, the standard rate per hour is $8.00, and the actual hours worked
per box are 0.10 hours. This computes as an unfavorable outcome. This is an unfavorable outcome because
the actual rate per hour was more than the standard rate per hour. As a result of this unfavorable outcome
418                                                                                                    Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances

information, the company may consider using cheaper labor, changing the production process to be more
efficient, or increasing prices to cover labor costs.
Another element this company and others must consider is a direct labor time variance.

Direct Labor Time Variance

The direct labor time variance compares the actual labor hours used to the standard labor hours that were
expected to be used to make the actual units produced. The variance is calculated using this formula:

Factoring out the standard rate per hour from both components of the formula, it can be rewritten as:

With either of these formulas, the actual hours worked refers to the actual number of hours used at the actual
production output. The standard rate per hour is the expected hourly rate paid to workers. The standard hours
are the expected number of hours used at the actual production output. If there is no difference between the
actual hours worked and the standard hours, the outcome will be zero, and no variance exists.

If the actual hours worked are less than the standard hours at the actual production output level, the variance
will be a favorable variance. A favorable outcome means you used fewer hours than anticipated to make the
actual number of production units. If, however, the actual hours worked are greater than the standard hours
at the actual production output level, the variance will be unfavorable. An unfavorable outcome means you
used more hours than anticipated to make the actual number of production units.

The actual hours used can differ from the standard hours because of improved efficiencies in production,
carelessness or inefficiencies in production, or poor estimation when creating the standard usage.

Consider the previous example with Connie's Candy Company. Connie's Candy establishes a standard rate per
hour for labor of $8.00. Each box of candy is expected to require 0.10 hours of labor (6 minutes). Connie's
Candy found that the actual hours worked per box were 0.05 hours (3 minutes). The actual rate per hour for
labor remained at $8.00 to make each box. The direct labor time variance computes as:

              Direct Labor Time Variance = (0.05 - 0.10) × $8.00 per hour = - $0.40 or $0.40 Favorable

In this case, the actual hours worked are 0.05 per box, the standard hours are 0.10 per box, and the standard
rate per hour is $8.00. This computes as a favorable outcome. This is a favorable outcome because the actual
hours worked were less than the standard hours expected. As a result of this favorable outcome information,
the company may consider continuing operations as they exist, or could change future budget projections to
reflect higher profit margins, among other things.

Let us take the same example except now the actual hours worked are 0.20 hours per box. The direct labor
time variance computes as:

     Direct  Labor  Time  Variance  =  ($0.20  -  $0.10)  ×  $8.00                per  hour  =  $0.80  or  $0.80  Unfavorable  
                                                                                                                               

In this case, the actual hours worked per box are 0.20, the standard hours per box are 0.10, and the standard

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances  419

rate per hour is $8.00. This computes as an unfavorable outcome. This is an unfavorable outcome because the
actual hours worked were more than the standard hours expected per box. As a result of this unfavorable
outcome information, the company may consider retraining its workers, changing the production process to
be more efficient, or increasing prices to cover labor costs.
The combination of the two variances can produce one overall total direct labor cost variance.

   THINK IT THROUGH

   Package Deliveries

   UPS drivers are evaluated on how many miles they drive and how quickly they deliver packages. The
   drivers are given the route and time they are expected to take, so they are expected to complete their
   route in a timely and efficient manner. They also work until all packages are delivered. A GPS tracking
   system tracks the trucks throughout the day. The system keeps track of how much they back up and if
   they take any left turns because right turns are much more time efficient.[3] Tracking drivers like this does
   not leave them very much time to deal with customers. Customer service is a major part of the driver's
   job. Can the driver service the customer and drive the route in the time and distance allotted? Which is
   more important: customer service or driving the route in a timely and efficient manner?

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Watch this video presenting an instructor walking through the steps involved in calculating direct labor
   variances (https://openstax.org/l/50DirLaborVar) to learn more.

Total Direct Labor Variance

When a company makes a product and compares the actual labor cost to the standard labor cost, the result is
the total direct labor variance.

If the outcome is unfavorable, the actual costs related to labor were more than the expected (standard) costs.
If the outcome is favorable, the actual costs related to labor are less than the expected (standard) costs.
The total direct labor variance is also found by combining the direct labor rate variance and the direct labor
time variance. By showing the total direct labor variance as the sum of the two components, management can
better analyze the two variances and enhance decision-making.
Figure 8.4 shows the connection between the direct labor rate variance and direct labor time variance to total

3 Graham Kendall. "Why UPS Drivers Don't Turn Left and Why You Shouldn't Either." The Conversation. January 20, 2017.
http://theconversation.com/why-ups-drivers-dont-turn-left-and-you-probably-shouldnt-either-71432
420                                                                                              Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances

direct labor variance.

Figure 8.4     Direct Labor Variance. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
license)

For example, Connie's Candy Company expects to pay a rate of $8.00 per hour for labor but actually pays $9.50
per hour. The company expected to use 0.10 hours of labor per box but actually used 0.20 hours per box. The
total direct labor variance is computed as:

Total  Direct  Labor  Time  Variance  =  (0.20  hours  ×  $9.50)  -  (0.10  hours  ×  $8.00)  =  $1.90  -  $0.80  =  $1.10  Unfavorable  
                                                                                                                                         

In this case, two elements are contributing to the unfavorable outcome. Connie's Candy paid $1.50 per hour
more for labor than expected and used 0.10 hours more than expected to make one box of candy. The same
calculation is shown as follows using the outcomes of the direct labor rate and time variances.

As with the interpretations for the labor rate and time variances, the company would review the individual
components contributing to the overall unfavorable outcome for the total direct labor variance, and possibly
make changes to production elements as a result.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances                                                                          421

YOUR TURN

Sweet and Fresh Shampoo Labor

Biglow Company makes a hair shampoo called Sweet and Fresh. Each bottle has a standard labor cost of
1.5 hours at $35.00 per hour. During May, Biglow manufactured 11,000 bottles. They used 16,000 hours at
a cost of $565,600. Calculate the labor rate variance, labor time variance, and total labor variance.
Solution

   CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

   Labor Costs in Service Industries

   In the service industry, labor is the main cost. Doctors, for example, have a time allotment for a physical
   exam and base their fee on the expected time. Insurance companies pay doctors according to a set
   schedule, so they set the labor standard. They pay a set rate for a physical exam, no matter how long it
   takes. If the exam takes longer than expected, the doctor is not compensated for that extra time. This
   would produce an unfavorable labor variance for the doctor. Doctors know the standard and try to
   schedule accordingly so a variance does not exist. If anything, they try to produce a favorable variance by
   seeing more patients in a quicker time frame to maximize their compensation potential.

 8.4 Compute and Evaluate Overhead Variances

Recall that the standard cost of a product includes not only materials and labor but also variable and fixed
overhead. It is likely that the amounts determined for standard overhead costs will differ from what actually
occurs. This will lead to overhead variances.
422  Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances

Determination and Evaluation of Overhead Variance

In a standard cost system, overhead is applied to the goods based on a standard overhead rate. This is similar
to the predetermined overhead rate used previously. The standard overhead rate is calculated by dividing
budgeted overhead at a given level of production (known as normal capacity) by the level of activity required
for that particular level of production.

Usually, the level of activity is either direct labor hours or direct labor cost, but it could be machine hours or
units of production.

Creation of Flexible Overhead Budget

To determine the overhead standard cost, companies prepare a flexible budget that gives estimated
revenues and costs at varying levels of production. The standard overhead cost is usually expressed as the
sum of its component parts, fixed and variable costs per unit. Note that at different levels of production, total
fixed costs are the same, so the standard fixed cost per unit will change for each production level. However,
the variable standard cost per unit is the same per unit for each level of production, but the total variable costs
will change.

We continue to use Connie's Candy Company to illustrate. Suppose Connie's Candy budgets capacity of
production at 100% and determines expected overhead at this capacity. Connie's Candy also wants to
understand what overhead cost outcomes will be at 90% capacity and 110% capacity. The following
information is the flexible budget Connie's Candy prepared to show expected overhead at each capacity level.

Units of output at 100% is 1,000 candy boxes (units). The standard overhead rate is the total budgeted
overhead of $10,000 divided by the level of activity (direct labor hours) of 2,000 hours. Notice that fixed
overhead remains constant at each of the production levels, but variable overhead changes based on unit
output. If Connie's Candy only produced at 90% capacity, for example, they should expect total overhead to be
$9,600 and a standard overhead rate of $5.33 (rounded). If Connie's Candy produced 2,200 units, they should
expect total overhead to be $10,400 and a standard overhead rate of $4.73 (rounded). In addition to the total
standard overhead rate, Connie's Candy will want to know the variable overhead rates at each activity level.
Using the flexible budget, we can determine the standard variable cost per unit at each level of production by
taking the total expected variable overhead divided by the level of activity, which can still be direct labor hours
or machine hours.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances                                                                       423

Looking at Connie's Candies, the following table shows the variable overhead rate at each of the production
capacity levels.

Production Capacity                     Variable/Unit

90%                                     $3,600/1,800 = $2

100%                                    $4,000/2,000 = $2

110%                                    $4,400/2,200 = $2

Sometimes these flexible budget figures and overhead rates differ from the actual results, which produces a
variance.

Determination of Variable Overhead Variances

There are two components to variable overhead rates: the overhead application rate and the activity level
against which that rate was applied. If we compare the actual variable overhead to the standard variable
overhead, by analyzing the difference between actual overhead costs and the standard overhead for current
production, it is difficult to determine if the variance is due to application rate differences or activity level
differences. Thus, there are two variable overhead variances that will better provide these answers: the
variable overhead rate variance and the variable overhead efficiency variance.

Determination of Variable Overhead Rate Variance

The variable overhead rate variance, also known as the spending variance, is the difference between the
actual variable manufacturing overhead and the variable overhead that was expected given the number of
hours worked. The variable overhead rate variance is calculated using this formula:

Factoring out actual hours worked, we can rewrite the formula as

If the outcome is favorable (a negative outcome occurs in the calculation), this means the company spent less
than what it had anticipated for variable overhead. If the outcome is unfavorable (a positive outcome occurs in
the calculation), this means the company spent more than what it had anticipated for variable overhead.
Connie's Candy Company wants to determine if its variable overhead spending was more or less than
anticipated. Connie's Candy had this data available in the flexible budget:
424                                                                                                       Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances

Connie's Candy also had this actual output information:

To determine the variable overhead rate variance, the standard variable overhead rate per hour and the actual
variable overhead rate per hour must be determined. The standard variable overhead rate per hour is $2.00
($4,000/2,000 hours), taken from the flexible budget at 100% capacity. The actual variable overhead rate is
$2.80 ($7,000/2,500), taken from the actual results at 100% capacity. Therefore,

     Variable  Overhead  Rate  Variance     =  ($2.80    -                        $2.00) ×  2,500  =  $2,000  Unfavorable  
                                                                                                                           

This produces an unfavorable outcome. This could be for many reasons, and the production supervisor would
need to determine where the variable cost difference is occurring to make production changes.

Let us look at another example producing a favorable outcome. Connie's Candy had this data available in the
flexible budget:

Connie's Candy also had this actual output information:

To determine the variable overhead rate variance, the standard variable overhead rate per hour and the actual
variable overhead rate per hour must be determined. The standard variable overhead rate per hour is $2.00
($4,000/2,000 hours), taken from the flexible budget at 100% capacity. The actual variable overhead rate is
$1.75 ($3,500/2,000), taken from the actual results at 100% capacity. Therefore,

     Variable  Overhead  Rate  Variance  =  ($1.75  -    $2.00) ×                 $2,000    =      -$500  or  $500  Favorable  
                                                                                                                               

This produces a favorable outcome. This could be for many reasons, and the production supervisor would

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances                            425

need to determine where the variable cost difference is occurring to better understand the variable overhead
reduction.

Interpretation of the variable overhead rate variance is often difficult because the cost of one overhead item,
such as indirect labor, could go up, but another overhead cost, such as indirect materials, could go down.
Often, explanation of this variance will need clarification from the production supervisor. Another variable
overhead variance to consider is the variable overhead efficiency variance.

Determination of Variable Overhead Efficiency Variance

The variable overhead efficiency variance, also known as the controllable variance, is driven by the
difference between the actual hours worked and the standard hours expected for the units produced. This
variance measures whether the allocation base was efficiently used. The variable overhead efficiency variance
is calculated using this formula:

Factoring out standard overhead rate, the formula can be written as

If the outcome is favorable (a negative outcome occurs in the calculation), this means the company was more
efficient than what it had anticipated for variable overhead. If the outcome is unfavorable (a positive outcome
occurs in the calculation), this means the company was less efficient than what it had anticipated for variable
overhead.
Connie's Candy Company wants to determine if its variable overhead efficiency was more or less than
anticipated. Connie's Candy had the following data available in the flexible budget:

Connie's Candy also had the following actual output information:

To determine the variable overhead efficiency variance, the actual hours worked and the standard hours
worked at the production capacity of 100% must be determined. Actual hours worked are 2,500, and standard
426                                                                                                       Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances

hours are 2,000. The standard variable overhead rate per hour is $2.00 ($4,000/2,000 hours), taken from the
flexible budget at 100% capacity. Therefore,

     Variable Overhead Efficiency  ariance  =  (2,500                             -  2,000)  ×  $2.00  =  $1,000  Unfavorable  
                                                                                                                               

This produces an unfavorable outcome. This could be for many reasons, and the production supervisor would
need to determine where the variable cost difference is occurring to make production changes.

Let us look at another example producing a favorable outcome. Connie's Candy had the following data
available in the flexible budget:

Connie's Candy also had the following actual output information:

To determine the variable overhead efficiency variance, the actual hours worked and the standard hours
worked at the production capacity of 100% must be determined. Actual hours worked are 1,800, and standard
hours are 2,000. The standard variable overhead rate per hour is $2.00 ($4,000/2,000 hours), taken from the
flexible budget at 100% capacity. Therefore,

             Variable Overhead Efficiency ariance = (1,800 - 2,000) × $2.00 = -$400 or $400 Favorable

This produces a favorable outcome. This could be for many reasons, and the production supervisor would
need to determine where the variable cost difference is occurring to better understand the variable overhead
efficiency reduction.

The total variable overhead cost variance is also found by combining the variable overhead rate variance
and the variable overhead efficiency variance. By showing the total variable overhead cost variance as the sum
of the two components, management can better analyze the two variances and enhance decision-making.

Figure 8.5 shows the connection between the variable overhead rate variance and variable overhead efficiency
variance to total variable overhead cost variance.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances                                                                         427

Figure 8.5 Variable Overheard Cost Variance. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-
NC-SA 4.0 license)

For example, Connie's Candy Company had the following data available in the flexible budget:

Connie's Candy also had the following actual output information:

The variable overhead rate variance is calculated as (1,800 × $1.94) - (1,800 × $2.00) = -$108, or $108
(favorable). The variable overhead efficiency variance is calculated as (1,800 × $2.00) - (2,000 × $2.00) = -$400,
or $400 (favorable).

The total variable overhead cost variance is computed as:

Total  Variable  Overhead               Cost  Variance  =  (-$108) + (-$400)  =  -$508  or  $508  Favorable  
                                                                                                             

In this case, two elements are contributing to the favorable outcome. Connie's Candy used fewer direct labor
hours and less variable overhead to produce 1,000 candy boxes (units).

The same calculation is shown as follows in diagram format.
428  Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances

As with the interpretations for the variable overhead rate and efficiency variances, the company would review
the individual components contributing to the overall favorable outcome for the total variable overhead cost
variance, before making any decisions about production in the future. Other variances companies consider are
fixed factory overhead variances.

Fundamentals of Fixed Factory Overhead Variances

The fixed factory overhead variance represents the difference between the actual fixed overhead and the
applied fixed overhead. There are two fixed overhead variances. One variance determines if too much or too
little was spent on fixed overhead. The other variance computes whether or not actual production was above
or below the expected production level.

   YOUR TURN
   Sweet and Fresh Shampoo Overhead

   Biglow Company makes a hair shampoo called Sweet and Fresh. They have the following flexible budget
   data:

   What is the standard variable overhead rate at 90%, 100%, and 110% capacity levels?
   Solution
   90% = $315,000/14,000 = $22.50, 100% = $346,000/16,000 = $21.63 (rounded), 110% = $378,000/18,000 =

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances                                                                     429

$21.00.

THINK IT THROUGH

Purchasing Planes

The XYZ Firm is bidding on a contract for a new plane for the military. As the management team is going
over the bid, they come to the conclusion it is too high on a per-plane basis, but they cannot find any
costs they feel can be reduced. The information from the military states they will purchase between 50
and 100 planes, but will more likely purchase 50 planes rather than 100 planes. XYZ's bid is based on 50
planes. The controller suggests that they base their bid on 100 planes. This would spread the fixed costs
over more planes and reduce the bid price. The lower bid price will increase substantially the chances of
XYZ winning the bid. Should XYZ Firm keep the bid at 50 planes or increase its bid to 100 planes? What
are the pros and cons to keeping the bid at 50 or increasing to 100 planes?

 8.5 Describe How Companies Use Variance Analysis

Companies use variance analysis in different ways. The starting point is the determination of standards
against which to compare actual results. Many companies produce variance reports, and the management
responsible for the variances must explain any variances outside of a certain range. Some companies only
require that unfavorable variances be explained, while many companies require both favorable and
unfavorable variances to be explained.

Requiring managers to determine what caused unfavorable variances forces them to identify potential
problem areas or consider if the variance was a one-time occurrence. Requiring managers to explain favorable
variances allows them to assess whether the favorable variance is sustainable. Knowing what caused the
favorable variance allows management to plan for it in the future, depending on whether it was a one-time
variance or it will be ongoing.

Another possibility is that management may have built the favorable variance into the standards.
Management may overestimate the material price, labor rate, material quantity, or labor hours per unit, for
example. This method of overestimation, sometimes called budget slack, is built into the standards so
management can still look good even if costs are higher than planned. In either case, managers potentially
can help other managers and the company overall by noticing particular problem areas or by sharing
knowledge that can improve variances.

Often, management will manage "to the variances," meaning they will make decisions that may not be
advantageous to the company's best interests over the long run, in order to meet the variance report
threshold limits. This can occur when the standards are improperly established, causing significant differences
between actual and standard numbers.
430  Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances

   ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

   Ethical Long-Term Decisions in Variance Analysis

   The proper use of variance analysis is a significant tool for an organization to reach its long-term goals.
   When its accounting system recognizes a variance, an organization needs to understand the significant
   influence of accounting not only in recording its financial results, but also in how reacting to that
   variance can shape management's behavior toward reaching its goals.[4] Many managers use variance
   analysis only to determine a short-term reaction, and do not analyze why the variance occurred from a
   long-term perspective. A more long-term analysis of variances allows an approach that "is responsibility
   accounting in which authority and accountability for tasks is delegated downward to those managers
   with the most influence and control over them."[5] It is important for managers to analyze the reported
   variances with more than just a short-term perspective.

   Managers sometimes focus only on making numbers for the current period. For example, a manager
   might decide to make a manufacturing division's results look profitable in the short term at the expense
   of reaching the organization's long-term goals. A recognizable cost variance could be an increase in
   repair costs as a percentage of sales on an increasing basis. This variance could indicate that equipment
   is not operating efficiently and is increasing overall cost. However, the expense of implementing new,
   more efficient equipment might be higher than repairing the current equipment. In the short term, it
   might be more economical to repair the outdated equipment, but in the long term, purchasing more
   efficient equipment would help the organization reach its goal of eco-friendly manufacturing. If the
   system use for controlling costs is not aligned to reinforce management of the organization with a long-
   term perspective, "the manager has no organizational incentive to be concerned with important issues
   unrelated to anything but the immediate costs"[6] related to the variance. A manager needs to be
   cognizant of his or her organization's goals when making decisions based on variance analysis.

Management can use standard costs to prepare the budget for the upcoming period, using the past
information to possibly make changes to production elements. Standard costs are a measurement tool and
can thus be used to evaluate performance. As you've learned, management may manage "to the variances"
and can manipulate results to meet expectations. To reduce this possibility, performance should be measured
on multiple outcomes, not simply on standard cost variances.

As shown in Table 8.1, standard costs have pros and cons to consider when using them in the decision-making
and evaluation processes.

4 Jeffrey R. Cohen and Laurie W. Pant. "The Only Thing That Counts Is That Which Is Counted: A Discussion of Behavioral and Ethical Issues in
Cost Accounting That Are Relevant for the OB Professor." September 18, 2018. http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/
download?doi=10.1.1.1026.5569&rep=rep1&type=pdf
5 Jeffrey R. Cohen and Laurie W. Pant. "The Only Thing That Counts Is That Which Is Counted: A Discussion of Behavioral and Ethical Issues in
Cost Accounting That Are Relevant for the OB Professor." September 18, 2018. http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/
download?doi=10.1.1.1026.5569&rep=rep1&type=pdf
6 Jeffrey R. Cohen and Laurie W. Pant. "The Only Thing That Counts Is That Which Is Counted: A Discussion of Behavioral and Ethical Issues in
Cost Accounting That Are Relevant for the OB Professor." September 18, 2018. http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/
download?doi=10.1.1.1026.5569&rep=rep1&type=pdf

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances  431

                     Pros                 Standard Costs

· Useful when developing a future                                              Cons
   budget
                                        · Might ignore customer and employee satisfaction rates
· Can be used as a benchmark for        · Information could be historical data and not useful in real-
   performance and quality
   expectations                            time decision-making needs
                                        · The system to manage and develop standard costs requires
· Can individually identify areas of
   success and areas for                   a lot of resources, which could be costly and time
   improvement                             consuming

Table 8.1

Standard costing provides many benefits and challenges, and a thorough analysis of each variance and the
possible unfavorable or favorable outcomes is required to set future expectations and adjust current
production goals.

The following is a summary of all direct materials variances (Figure 8.6), direct labor variances (Figure 8.7), and
overhead variances (Figure 8.8) presented as both formulas and tree diagrams. Note that for some of the
formulas, there are two presentations of the same formula, for example, there are two presentations of the
direct materials price variance. While both arrive at the same answer, students usually prefer one formula
structure over the other.
432  Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances

Figure 8.6 Direct Materials Variances. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA
4.0 license)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances  433

Figure 8.7  Direct Labor Variances. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
license)
434                                                                               Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances

Figure 8.8  Overhead Variances. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
license)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances                                                                      435

YOUR TURN

Barley, Inc. Production

Barley, Inc., produces a product and has the following as standard costs per unit for materials and labor:

For the month of October, the following information was gathered related to production:

Compute:
 A. The materials price and quantity variances
 B. The labor rate and efficiency variances
Provide possible explanations for each variance.
Solution
A.
Materials price variance:
$50,000 unfavorable = ($16* - $15) × 50,000 lb.
*$800,000/50,000
An unfavorable materials price variance occurred because the actual cost of materials was greater than the
expected or standard cost. This could occur if a higher-quality material was purchased or the suppliers raised
their prices.
Materials quantity variance:
$150,000 unfavorable = (50,000 lb. - 40,000* lb.) × $15 per lb.
*4 lb. × 10,000 units
An unfavorable materials quantity variance occurred because the pounds of materials used were greater than
the pounds expected to be used. This could occur if there were inefficiencies in production or the quality of the
materials was such that more needed to be used to meet safety or other standards.
Materials inputs:
436                                                                               Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances

     B.
     Labor rate variance:
     $50,000 favorable = ($18* per hour - $20 per hour) × 25,000 hours
     *$450,000/25,000
     A favorable labor rate variance occurred because the rate paid per hour was less than the rate expected to be
     paid (standard) per hour. This could occur because the company was able to hire workers at a lower rate,
     because of negotiated union contracts, or because of a poor labor rate estimate used in creating the standard.
     Labor quantity variance:
     $100,000 unfavorable = (25,000 hours - 20,000* hours) × $20 per hour
     *2 hours × 10,000 units
     An unfavorable labor quantity variance occurred because the actual hours worked to make the 10,000 units
     were greater than the expected hours to make that many units. This could occur because of inefficiencies of
     the workers, defects and errors that caused additional time reworking items, or the use of new workers who
     were less efficient.
     Labor inputs:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances  437

Figure 8.9 Labor variance for Barley, Inc. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-
SA 4.0 license)

THINK IT THROUGH

Explaining Differences in Expected and Actual Operational Outcomes

The manager of a plant has called operations, purchasing, and personnel into her office to discuss the
results of the last month. She notes that there was more than normal scrap, and employees worked
more hours than expected. She is looking for an explanation for these results. What system might she
have used to determine these material and labor issues? Why might these variances have occurred?
What should she do about it for future periods?

LINK TO LEARNING

Standard Costing Advantages Explained

See this article on the four major advantages of standard costing (https://openstax.org/l/
50StandCosting) to learn more.
438                                                                               Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances

     Key Terms

attainable standard level that may be reached with reasonable effort
direct labor rate variance difference between the actual rate paid and the standard rate that should have

     been paid based on the actual hours worked
direct labor time variance difference between the actual hours worked and the standard hours that should

     have been worked for the actual units produced
direct labor variance measures how efficiently the company uses labor as well as how effective it is at

     pricing labor
direct materials price variance difference between the actual price paid per unit for materials and what

     should have been paid per the standards
direct materials quantity variance difference between the actual quantity of materials used and the

     standard materials that were expected to be used to make the actual units produced
direct materials variance difference between the actual price or amount used and the standard amount
favorable variance difference involving spending less, or using less, than the standard amount
fixed factory overhead variance difference between the actual fixed overhead and applied fixed overhead
flexible budget measurement and prediction of estimated revenues and costs at varying levels of

     production
ideal standard level that could be achieved if everything ran perfectly
standard expectation for a component used in production
standard cost cost expectation for price paid and amount (quantities) used
total direct labor variance actual labor costs compared to standard labor costs
total direct materials cost variance difference between actual materials cost and standard materials cost
total variable overhead cost variance total cost variance found by combining variable overhead rate

     variance and variable overhead efficiency variance
unfavorable variance difference involving spending more or using more than the standard amount
variable overhead efficiency variance difference between the actual hours worked and the standard hours

     expected for the units produced
variable overhead rate variance difference between the actual variable manufacturing overhead and the

     variable overhead that was expected given the number of hours worked
variance difference between standard and actual performance

     Summary

8.1 Explain How and Why a Standard Cost Is Developed
  · Standards are budgeted unit amounts for price paid and amount used.
  · Variances are the difference between actual and standard amounts.
  · A favorable variance is when the actual price or quantity is less than the standard amount.
  · An unfavorable variance is when the actual price or amount is greater than the standard amount.

8.2 Compute and Evaluate Materials Variances
  · There are two components to material variances: the direct materials price variance and the direct
      materials quantity variance.
  · The direct materials price variance is caused by paying too much or too little for material.
  · The direct materials quantity variance is caused by using too much or too little material.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances                                                      439

8.3 Compute and Evaluate Labor Variances
  · There are two labor variances: the direct labor rate variance and the direct labor time variance.
  · The direct labor rate variance determines if the rate paid is greater than or less than the standard rate.
  · The direct labor time variance determines if the actual hours used are greater than or less than the
      standards that should have been used.

8.4 Compute and Evaluate Overhead Variances
  · There are two sets of overhead variances: variable and fixed.
  · The variable variances are caused by the overhead application rate and the activity level against which the
      rate was applied.
  · The variable overhead rate variance is the difference between the actual variable manufacturing
      overhead and the variable overhead that was expected given the number of hours worked.
  · The variable overhead efficiency variance is driven by the difference between the actual hours worked
      and the standard hours expected for the units produced.
  · There are two fixed overhead variances. One is caused by spending too much or too little on fixed
      overhead. The other is caused by actual production being above or below the expected production level.

8.5 Describe How Companies Use Variance Analysis
  · The key to analyzing variances is to determine why the variance occurred.
  · If a company cannot determine why there is a variance, it will not know if the variance is indicative of a
      problem or not.
  · All firms--manufacturing, retail, and service--use standards and variances.

     Multiple Choice

1. 8.1 Why does a company use a standard costing system?
    A. to identify variances from actual cost that assist them in maintaining profits
    B. to identify nonperformers in the workplace
    C. to identify what vendors are unreliable
    D. to identify defective materials

2. 8.1 This standard is set at a level that may be reached with reasonable effort.
    A. ideal standard
    B. attainable standard
    C. unattainable standard
    D. variance from standard

3. 8.1 This standard is set at a level that could be achieved if everything ran perfectly.
    A. ideal standard
    B. attainable standard
    C. unattainable standard
    D. variance from standard
440                                                                               Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances

4. 8.1 This variance is the difference involving spending more or using more than the standard amount.
    A. favorable variance
    B. unfavorable variance
    C. no variance
    D. variance

5. 8.1 This variance is the difference involving spending less, or using less than the standard amount.
    A. favorable variance
    B. unfavorable variance
    C. no variance
    D. variance

6. 8.2 What are some possible reasons for a material price variance?
    A. substandard material
    B. labor rate increases
    C. labor rate decreases
    D. labor efficiency

7. 8.2 When is the material price variance unfavorable?
    A. when the actual quantity used is greater than the standard quantity
    B. when the actual quantity used is less than the standard quantity
    C. when the actual price paid is greater than the standard price
    D. when the actual price is less than the standard price

8. 8.2 When is the material price variance favorable?
    A. when the actual quantity used is greater than the standard quantity
    B. when the actual quantity used is less than the standard quantity
    C. when the actual price paid is greater than the standard price
    D. when the actual price is less than the standard price

9. 8.2 What are some reasons for a material quantity variance?
    A. building rental charges increase
    B. labor rate decreases
    C. more qualified workers
    D. labor efficiency increases

10.     8.2 When is the material quantity variance favorable?
    A.  when the actual quantity used is greater than the standard quantity
    B.  when the actual quantity used is less than the standard quantity
    C.  when the actual price paid is greater than the standard price
    D.  when the actual price is less than the standard price

11.     8.2 When is the material quantity unfavorable?
    A.  when the actual quantity used is greater than the standard quantity
    B.  when the actual quantity used is less than the standard quantity
    C.  when the actual price paid is greater than the standard price
    D.  when the actual price is less than the standard price

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances                                                                441

12.     8.3 What are some possible reasons for a labor rate variance?
    A.  hiring of less qualified workers
    B.  an excess of material usage
    C.  material price increase
    D.  utilities usage change

13.     8.3 When is the labor rate variance unfavorable?
    A.  when the actual quantity used is greater than the standard quantity
    B.  when the actual quantity used is less than the standard quantity
    C.  when the actual price paid is greater than the standard price
    D.  when the actual price is less than the standard price

14.     8.3 When is the labor rate variance favorable?
    A.  when the actual quantity used is greater than the standard quantity
    B.  when the actual quantity used is less than the standard quantity
    C.  when the actual price paid is greater than the standard price
    D.  when the actual price is less than the standard price

15.     8.3 What are some possible reasons for a direct labor time variance?
    A.  utility usage decrease
    B.  less qualified workers
    C.  office supplies spending
    D.  sales decline

16.     8.3 When is the direct labor time variance favorable?
    A.  when the actual quantity used is greater than the standard quantity
    B.  when the actual quantity used is less than the standard quantity
    C.  when the actual price paid is greater than the standard price
    D.  when the actual price is less than the standard price

17.     8.3 When is the direct labor time variance unfavorable?
    A.  when the actual quantity used is greater than the standard quantity
    B.  when the actual quantity used is less than the standard quantity
    C.  when the actual price paid is greater than the standard price
    D.  when the actual price is less than the standard price

18.     8.4 A flexible budget ________.
    A.  predicts estimated revenues and costs at varying levels of production
    B.  gives actual figures for selling price
    C.  gives actual figures for variable and fixed overhead
    D.  is not used in overhead variance calculations

19.     8.4 The variable overhead rate variance is caused by the sum between which of the following?
    A.  actual and standard allocation base
    B.  actual and standard overhead rates
    C.  actual and budgeted units
    D.  actual units and actual overhead rates
442                                                                               Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances

20. 8.4 The variable overhead efficiency variance is caused by the difference between which of the
following?

    A. actual and budgeted units
    B. actual and standard allocation base
    C. actual and standard overhead rates
    D. actual units and actual overhead rates

21.     8.4 The fixed factory overhead variance is caused by the difference between which of the following?
    A.  actual and standard allocation base
    B.  actual and budgeted units
    C.  actual fixed overhead and applied fixed overhead
    D.  actual and standard overhead rates

22.     8.5 Which of the following is a possible cause of an unfavorable material price variance?
    A.  purchasing too much material
    B.  purchasing higher-quality material
    C.  hiring substandard workers
    D.  buying substandard material

23.     8.5 Which of the following is a possible cause of an unfavorable material quantity variance?
    A.  purchasing substandard material
    B.  hiring higher-quality workers
    C.  paying more than should have for workers
    D.  purchasing too much material

24.     8.5 Which of the following is a possible cause of an unfavorable labor efficiency variance?
    A.  hiring substandard workers
    B.  making too many units
    C.  buying higher-quality material
    D.  paying too much for workers

25.     8.5 Which of the following is a possible cause of an unfavorable labor rate variance?
    A.  hiring too many workers
    B.  hiring higher-quality workers at a higher wage
    C.  making too many units
    D.  purchasing too much material

     Questions

1. 8.1 What two components are needed to determine a standard for materials?
2. 8.1 What two components are needed to determine a standard for labor?
3. 8.1 What elements require consideration before establishing an overhead standard?
4. 8.1 What is a variance?
5. 8.2 What causes the material price variance?
6. 8.2 What causes the material quantity variance?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances                                              443

7. 8.2 What are some possible causes of a material price variance?
8. 8.2 What are some possible causes of a material quantity variance?
9. 8.3 What is the direct labor rate variance?
10. 8.3 What is the direct labor time variance?
11. 8.3 What are some possible causes of a direct labor rate variance?
12. 8.3 What are some possible causes of a direct labor time variance?
13. 8.3 How is the total direct labor variance calculated?
14. 8.4 What causes the variable overhead rate variance?
15. 8.4 What causes the variable overhead efficiency variance?
16. 8.4 What is the main difference between a flexible budget and a master budget?
17. 8.5 What causes a favorable variance?
18. 8.5 What causes an unfavorable variance?
19. 8.5 When might a favorable variance not be a good outcome?
20. 8.5 When might an unfavorable variance be a good outcome?
21. 8.5 Identify several causes of a favorable material price variance.
22. 8.5 Identify several causes of an unfavorable material price variance.
23. 8.5 Identify several causes of a favorable material quantity variance.
24. 8.5 Identify several causes of an unfavorable material quantity.
25. 8.5 Identify several causes of a favorable labor rate variance.
26. 8.5 Identify several causes of an unfavorable labor rate variance.
27. 8.5 Identify several causes of a favorable labor efficiency variance.
28. 8.5 Identify several causes of an unfavorable labor efficiency variance.

     Exercise Set A

EA1. 8.1 Moisha is developing material standards for her company. The operations manager wants grade A
widgets because they are the easiest to work with and are the quality the customers want. Grade B will not
work because customers do not want the lower grade, and it takes more time to assemble the product than
with grade A materials. Moisha calls several suppliers to get prices for the widget. All are within $0.05 of each
other. Since they will use millions of widgets, she decides that the $0.05 difference is important. The supplier
who has the lowest price is known for delivering late and low-quality materials. Moisha decides to use the
supplier who is $0.02 more but delivers on time and at the right quality. This supplier charges $0.48 per
widget. Each unit of product requires four widgets. What is the standard cost per unit for widgets?
444                                                                               Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances

EA2. 8.1 Rene is working with the operations manager to determine what the standard labor cost is for a
spice chest. He has watched the process from start to finish and taken detailed notes on what each employee
does. The first employee selects and mills the wood, so it is smooth on all four sides. This takes the employee 1
hour for each chest. The next employee takes the wood and cuts it to the proper size. This takes 30 minutes.
The next employee assembles and sands the chest. Assembly takes 2 hours. The chest then goes to the
finishing department. It takes 1.5 hours to finish the chest. All employees are cross-trained so they are all paid
the same amount per hour, $17.50.

    A. What are the standard hours per chest?
    B. What is the standard cost per chest for labor?

EA3. 8.1 Fiona cleans offices. She is allowed 5 seconds per square foot. She cleans building A, which is 3,000
square feet, and building B, which is 2,460 square feet. Will she finish these two buildings in an 8-hour shift?
Will she have time for a break?

EA4. 8.1 Use the information provided to create a standard cost card for production of one glove box
switch. To make one switch it takes 16 feet of plastic-coated copper wire and 0.5 pounds of plastic material.
The plastic material can usually be purchased for $20.00 per pound, and the wire costs $2.50 per foot. The
labor necessary to assemble a switch consists of two types. The first type of labor is assembly, which takes 3.5
hours. These workers are paid $27.00 per hour. The second type of labor is finishing, which takes 2 hours.
These workers are paid $29.00 per hour. Overhead is applied using labor hours. The variable overhead rate is
$14.90 per labor hour. The fixed overhead rate is $15.60 per hour.

EA5. 8.2 Sitka Industries uses a cost system that carries direct materials inventory at a standard cost. The
controller has established these standards for one ladder (unit):

Sitka Industries made 3,000 ladders in July and used 8,800 pounds of material to make these units. Smith
Industries bought 15,500 pounds of material in the current period. There was a $250 unfavorable direct
materials price variance.

    A. How much in total did Sitka pay for the 15,500 pounds?
    B. What is the direct materials quantity variance?
    C. What is the total direct material cost variance?
    D. What if 9,500 pounds were used to make these ladders, what would be the direct materials quantity

          variance?
    E. If there was a $340 favorable direct materials price variance, how much did Sitka pay for the 15,500

          pounds of material?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances                          445

EA6. 8.2 Use the information provided to answer the questions.

All material purchased was used in production.

    A. What is the standard price paid for materials?
    B. What is the direct materials quantity variance?
    C. What is the total direct materials cost variance?
    D. If the direct materials price variance was unfavorable, what would be the standard price?

EA7. 8.2 Dog Bone Bakery, which bakes dog treats, makes a special biscuit for dogs. Each biscuit uses 0.75
cup of pure semolina flour. They buy 4,000 cups of flour at $0.55 per cup. They use 3,550 cups of flour to make
4,750 biscuits. The standard cost per cup of flour is $0.53.

    A. What are the direct materials price variance, the direct materials quantity variances, and the total direct
          materials cost variance?

    B. What is the standard cost per biscuit for the semolina flour?

EA8. 8.3 Queen Industries uses a standard costing system in the manufacturing of its single product. It
requires 2 hours of labor to produce 1 unit of final product. In February, Queen Industries produced 12,000
units. The standard cost for labor allowed for the output was $90,000, and there was an unfavorable direct
labor time variance of $5,520.

    A. What was the standard cost per hour?
    B. How many actual hours were worked?
    C. If the workers were paid $3.90 per hour, what was the direct labor rate variance?

EA9. 8.3 Penny Company manufactures only one product and uses a standard cost system. The following
information is from Penny's records for May:

During May, the company used 12.5% more hours than the standard allowed.

    A. What were the total standard hours allowed for the units manufactured during the month?
    B. What were the actual hours worked?
    C. How many actual units were produced during May?

EA10. 8.4 ThingOne Company has the following information available for the past year. They use machine
hours to allocate overhead.

What is the variable overhead efficiency variance?
446                                                                               Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances

EA11. 8.4 A manufacturer planned to use $78 of variable overhead per unit produced, but in the most
recent period, it actually used $76 of variable overhead per unit produced. During this same period, the
company planned to produce 500 units but actually produced 540 units. What is the variable overhead
spending variance?

EA12. 8.5 Acme Inc. has the following information available:

    A. Compute the material price and quantity, and the labor rate and efficiency variances.
    B. Describe the possible causes for this combination of favorable and unfavorable variances.

EA13. 8.5 Acme Inc. has the following information available:

    A. Compute the material price and quantity, and the labor rate and efficiency variances.
    B. Describe the possible causes for this combination of favorable and unfavorable variances.

EA14. 8.5 Acme Inc. has the following information available:

     A. Compute the material price and quantity, and the labor rate and efficiency variances.
     B. Describe the possible causes for this combination of favorable and unfavorable variances.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances  447

  B Exercise Set B

EB1. 8.1 Bristol is developing material standards for her company. The operations manager wants grade A
plastic tops because they are the easiest to work with and are the quality the customers want. Grade B will not
work because customers do not want the lower grade, and it takes more time to assemble the product than
with grade A materials. Bristol calls several suppliers to get prices for the plastic top. All are within $0.10 of
each other. Since the company will use millions of the plastic tops, she decides that the $0.10 difference is
important. The supplier who has the lowest price is known for delivering late and low-quality materials. Bristol
decides to use the supplier who is $0.04 more but delivers on time and at the right quality. This supplier
charges $0.52 per plastic top. Each unit of product requires six plastic tops. What is the standard cost per unit
for plastic tops?

EB2. 8.1 Salley is developing material and labor standards for her company. She finds that it costs $0.55 per
pound of material per widget. Each widget requires 6 pounds of material per widget. Salley is also working
with the operations manager to determine what the standard labor cost is for a widget. Upon observation,
Salley notes that it takes 3 hours in the assembly department and 1 hour in the finishing department to
complete one widget. All employees are paid $10.50 per hour.

    A. What is the standard materials cost per unit for a widget?
    B. What is the standard labor cost per unit for a widget?

EB3. 8.1 Use the following information to create a standard cost card for production of one photography
drone from Drone Experts.

To make one drone it takes 2 pounds of plastic material. The material can usually be purchased for $25.00 per
pound. The labor necessary to build a drone consists of two types. The first type of labor is assembly, which
takes 10.5 hours. These workers are paid $21.00 per hour. The second type of labor is finishing, which takes 7
hours. These workers are paid $25.00 per hour. Overhead is applied using labor hours. The variable overhead
rate is $14.00 per labor hour. The fixed overhead rate is $16.00 per hour.

EB4. 8.1 Mateo makes gizmos. He would like to set up a system to help him manage his business. The
gizmos are made in a standard process. There is a certain amount of material and labor that goes into each
gizmo. The only difference between the gizmo is the color of the material. What information should Mateo
collect, how should he format it, and what kind of reports should he prepare to help him run his business?
448                                                                               Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances

EB5. 8.2 Smith Industries uses a cost system that carries direct materials inventory at a standard cost. The
controller has established these standards for the cost of one basket (unit):

Smith Industries made 3,000 baskets in July and used 15,500 pounds of material to make these units. Smith
Industries paid $39,370 for the 15,500 pounds of material.

    A. What was the direct materials price variance for July?
    B. What was the direct materials quantity variance for July?
    C. What is the total direct materials cost variance?
    D. If Smith Industries used 15,750 pounds to make the baskets, what would be the direct materials

          quantity variance?

EB6. 8.2 Lizbeth, Inc., makes ice cream. The toffee coffee ice cream takes 4 quarts of cream, 3 cups of sugar,
2 tablespoons of toffee flavoring, and 1.5 tablespoons of coffee flavoring per gallon. The standard prices are
$2.00 per quart of cream, $0.40 per cup of sugar, $0.50 per tablespoon of toffee flavoring, and $0.75 per
tablespoon of coffee flavoring.

    A. What is the standard material cost for a gallon of toffee coffee ice cream?
    B. If Lizbeth makes 35 gallons of toffee coffee ice cream, how much of each of the ingredients should she

          use?
    C. If Lizbeth uses 105 quarts of cream to make 25 gallons of ice cream, what would be the cream (direct

          materials) quantity variance?
    D. If Lizbeth uses 45 tablespoons of toffee flavoring to make 25 gallons of ice cream, what would be the

          toffee flavoring (direct materials) quantity variance?

EB7. 8.2 Woodpecker manufactures sawmill equipment. They use a standard costing system and recognize
material price variance at the time of material purchases. They use carbide to make the teeth on their band-
saw blades. They received an order for 250 band-saw blades, but they did not have any carbide in stock. They
purchased 3,500 pounds of carbide for $14,875 but should have spent $16,275. Each saw blade has a standard
carbide direct materials quantity of 7.8 pounds.

    A. If they used 8 pounds per blade, what would be the direct materials quantity variance?
    B. If they used 7.5 pounds per blade, what would be the direct materials quantity variance?
    C. Compute the direct materials price variance based on 7.5 pounds of carbide per blade actually used.

EB8. 8.3 Case made 24,500 units during June, using 32,000 direct labor hours. They expected to use 31,450
hours per the standard cost card. Their employees were paid $15.75 per hour for the month of June. The
standard cost card uses $15.50 as the standard hourly rate.

    A. Compute the direct labor rate and time variances for the month of June, and also calculate the total
          direct labor variance.

    B. If the standard rate per hour was $16.00, what would change?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances                                                            449

EB9. 8.3 Eagle Inc. uses a standard cost system. During the most recent period, the company manufactured
115,000 units. The standard cost sheet indicates that the standard direct labor cost per unit is $1.50. The
performance report for the period includes an unfavorable direct labor rate variance of $3,700 and a favorable
direct labor time variance of $10,275.
What was the total actual cost of direct labor incurred during the period?

EB10. 8.4 A manufacturer planned to use $45 of variable overhead per unit produced, but in the most
recent period, it actually used $47 of variable overhead per unit produced. During this same period, the
company planned to produce 200 units but actually produced 220 units. What is the variable overhead
spending variance?

EB11. 8.4 Fitzgerald Company manufactures sewing machines, and they produced 2,500 this past month.
The standard variable manufacturing overhead (MOH) rate used by the company is $6.75 per machine hour.
Each sewing machine requires 13.5 machine hours. Actual machine hours used last month were 33,500, and
the actual variable MOH rate last month was $7.00.

Calculate the variable overhead rate variance and the variable overhead efficiency variance.

EB12. 8.5 Acme Inc. has the following information available:

    A. Compute the material price and quantity, and the labor rate and efficiency variances.
    B. Describe the possible causes for this combination of favorable and unfavorable variances.
EB13. 8.5 Acme Inc. has the following information available:

    A. Compute the material price and quantity, and the labor rate and efficiency variances.
    B. Describe the possible causes for this combination of favorable and unfavorable variances.
450                                                                               Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances

EB14. 8.5 Acme Inc. has the following information available:

    A. Compute the material price and quantity, and the labor rate and efficiency variances.
    B. Describe the possible causes for this combination of favorable and unfavorable variances.

     Problem Set A

PA1. 8.1 The comptroller wants to set the standards according to a study done by a consulting firm for a
company. The consulting firm used the following assumptions: The machines never break down. Workers
never take a break. The material used is perfect. The material arrives on time. No one takes a day off. Workers
are well trained. Workers do not make defective units. What kinds of standards are these? Will the workers be
motivated to achieve these standards?

PA2. 8.1 Stan is opening a coffee shop next to Big State University. He knows that controlling his costs will
be important to the success of the shop. He will not be able to work all the hours the shop is open, so the
employees will need some guidelines to perform their jobs correctly. After talking to an accounting professor,
he decides he needs a standard cost system for his shop. Describe the process Stan should follow in setting his
standards for materials and labor.

PA3. 8.1 What makes a variance favorable? Give an example of a favorable variance involving materials.
What makes a variance unfavorable? Give an example of an unfavorable variance involving labor.

PA4. 8.2 April Industries employs a standard costing system in the manufacturing of its sole product, a park
bench. They purchased 60,000 feet of raw material for $300,000, and it takes 5 feet of raw materials to produce
one park bench. In August, the company produced 10,000 park benches. The standard cost for material output
was $100,000, and there was an unfavorable direct materials quantity variance of $6,000.

    A. What is April Industries' standard price for one unit of material?
    B. What was the total number of units of material used to produce the August output?
    C. What was the direct materials price variance for August?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances                                                                        451

PA5. 8.2 Ed Co. manufactures two types of O rings, large and small. Both rings use the same material but
require different amounts. Standard materials for both are shown.

           Large                                           Small

Rubber     3 feet at $0.25 per foot                        1.25 feet at $0.25 per foot

Connector  1 at $0.03                                      1 at $0.03

At the beginning of the month, Edve Co. bought 25,000 feet of rubber for $6,875. The company made 3,000
large O rings and 4,000 small O rings. The company used 14,500 feet of rubber.

    A. What are the direct materials price variance, the direct materials quantity variance, and the total direct
          materials cost variance?

    B. If they bought 10,000 connectors costing $310, what would the direct materials price variance be for
          the connectors?

    C. If there was an unfavorable direct materials price variance of $125, how much did they pay per foot for
          the rubber?

PA6. 8.2 The Whizbang Company makes a special type of toy. Each top takes 6 ounces of a special material
that costs $3 per ounce. Whizbang bought 4,000 ounces of the material at a cost of $11,300. They used 3,400
ounces to make 534 toys. Compute the direct materials price variance, the direct materials quantity variance,
and the total direct materials cost variance.

PA7. 8.3 Ellis Company's labor information for September is as follows:

    A. Compute the standard direct labor rate per hour.
    B. Compute the direct labor time variance.
    C. Compute the standard direct labor rate if the direct labor rate variance was $2,712.50 (unfavorable).

PA8. 8.3 Breakaway Company's labor information for May is as follows:

A. What is the actual direct labor rate per hour?
B. What is the standard direct labor rate per hour?
C. What was the total standard direct labor cost for May?
D. What was the direct labor rate variance for May?
452                                                             Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances

PA9. 8.3 Power Co.'s labor information for June is as follows:

    A. What was the actual labor rate per hour?
    B. What was the standard labor rate per hour?
    C. What was the total standard labor cost for units produced in June?
    D. What was the direct labor time variance for June?

PA10. 8.4 Prepare a flexible budget for overhead based on the following data:

PA11. 8.4 Reddy Corporation has collected the following data for the month of June:

What is the variable overhead efficiency variance?
PA12. 8.4 ABC Inc. spent a total of $48,000 on factory overhead. Of this, $28,000 was fixed overhead. ABC
Inc. had budgeted $27,000 for fixed overhead. Actual machine hours were 5,000. Standard hours for units
made were 4,800. The standard variable overhead rate was $4.10. What is the variable overhead rate
variance?
PA13. 8.5 Recompute the variances from the second Acme Inc. exercise using $0.0725 as the standard cost
of the material and $14 as the standard labor cost per hour. How has your explanation of the variances
changed?

  B Problem Set B

PB1. 8.1 Sameerah is trying to determine the standard hours to make one unit. She has studied the
manufacturing process and is trying to determine what portion of the employees' time should be included in
the standard time to make the product. She knows that the actual time the worker is assembling, cutting, and
painting should be part of the standard hours. She is questioning whether setup, down time, rest periods, and
cleanup should be part of the standard hours. Explain why you would or would not include these times.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances                           453

PB2. 8.1 Carl cleans offices. He has the following buildings to clean every day: building A, which is 12,500
square feet; building B, which is 24,500 square feet; building C, which is 10,500 square feet; and building D,
which is 6,700 square feet. He is allowed 5 seconds per square foot. Each employee is allowed one 30-minute
lunch per shift. How many employees will he need to hire?

PB3. 8.1 Freidrich is working with the operations manager to determine what the standard material cost is
for a spice chest. He has watched the process from start to finish and taken detailed notes on what material is
used. The easiest material to measure is the wood. Each chest uses 5 board feet and produces 1.5 feet of
scrap. He is not sure what to do with the scrap that is produced; the company cannot buy the boards in any
other dimensions. What amount of materials should be included in the standard for material costs?

PB4. 8.2 A company bought 45,000 pounds of plastic pellets to make DVDs at a cost of $9,900. The standard
cost per pound for the pellets is 20.5 cents. Some of these pellets were used in three jobs. The first job called
for 7,500 pounds but used 7,250 pounds. The second job called for 8,800 pounds but used 9,000 pounds. The
third job called for 2,300 pounds but used 2,250 pounds. Compute the direct materials price variance and the
direct materials quantity variance for each job and in total. Why would you want to calculate the direct
materials quantity variance for each job?

PB5. 8.2 Illinois Company is a medium-sized company that makes dresses. During the month of June, 8,575
dresses were made. All material purchases were used to make the dresses. The company had this information:
standard per dress of 6 yards of material at $6.20 per yard. The actual quantity was 52,000 yards at a cost of
$325,520. Compute the direct materials price variance, the direct materials quantity variance, and the total
direct materials cost variance.

PB6. 8.2 Corolla Manufacturing has a standard cost for steel of $20 per pound for a product that uses 4
pounds of steel. During September, Corolla purchased and used 4,200 pounds of steel to make 1,040 units.
They paid $20.75 per pound for the steel. Compute the direct materials price variance, the direct materials
quantity variance, and the total direct materials cost variance for the month of September. What would change
if Corolla had made 2,200 units?

PB7. 8.3 Marymount Company makes one product. In the month of April, it made 3,500 units. Workers were
paid $32 per hour for labor, for a total of $718,848. The standard hours per unit are 6.4, and the standard labor
wage rate is $38.40 per hour.

    A. What are the actual hours worked?
    B. What are the standard hours for the units made?
    C. What is the direct labor rate variance for April?
    D. What is the direct labor time variance for April?
    E. What is the total direct labor variance for April?

PB8. 8.3 Adam Inc.'s records for May include the following information:

A. What are Adam's standard labor hours for the units made?
B. What is Adam's total standard labor cost for the units made?
454                                                                               Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances

PB9. 8.3 Ribco's labor cost information for making its only product for March is as follows:

    A. What is the direct labor rate variance?
    B. What is the direct labor time variance?
    C. What is the total direct labor variance?

PB10. 8.5 Use the following standard cost card for 1 gallon of ice cream to answer the questions.

Actual direct costs incurred to make 50 gallons of ice cream:

      · 275 quarts of cream at $1.05 per quart
      · 832 ounces of sugar at $0.075 per ounce
      · 165 minutes of labor at $37 per hour

All material used was bought during the current period.

    A. Compute the material and labor variances.
    B. Comment on the results and possible causes of the variances.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances                                                             455

PB11. 8.5 Use the following standard cost card for 1 gallon of ice cream to answer the questions.

Actual direct costs incurred to make 50 gallons of ice cream:
      · 275 quarts of cream at $1.05 per quart
      · 832 ounces of sugar at $0.075 per ounce
      · 165 minutes of labor at $37 per hour

All materials used were bought during the current period.
    A. Compute the material and labor variances.
    B. Comment on the results and possible causes of the variances.

     Thought Provokers

TP1. 8.1 How do you balance a firm's need to succeed and the need for not asking the workers for
perfection?

TP2. 8.1 What type of firm would use standard costing? What type of firm would not use standard costing?

TP3. 8.2 You started your own construction business and need to determine the cost of materials used to
build one house, and how many materials you will need to do so.

      · Where would you begin to determine the standard price and quantity needs to build one house?
      · What would produce a difference between the standard cost to build a house and the actual cost?

          What would cause a favorable outcome? What would cause an unfavorable outcome?
      · What action might your company take if you had an unfavorable total direct materials cost variance?

TP4. 8.3 Is labor a true variable cost?

TP5. 8.4 Why would managers use a flexible budget? What information does it provide that a regular
budget does not?

TP6. 8.4 Fill in the blanks in the following flexible budget:
456                                                                               Chapter 8 Standard Costs and Variances

TP7. 8.4 Before automation became more prevalent, overhead was often calculated and allocated as a
function of direct labor costs or direct labor hours. Why was this the case, and has this pattern changed?

TP8. 8.5 In your opinion, is it important that an organization set standards and measure them monthly?
Why or why not?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
     9

              Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization

Figure 9.1 Food Trucks. Food trucks have grown significantly in popularity. They allow customers to try a
variety of foods that are served quickly, and they often set up in locations that are convenient for customers.
The mobility of food trucks adds another dimension that has broad appeal. (credit: modification of "Food
Truck" by David Stanley/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 2.0)

 Chapter Outline

  9.1 Differentiate between Centralized and Decentralized Management
  9.2 Describe How Decision-Making Differs between Centralized and Decentralized Environments
  9.3 Describe the Types of Responsibility Centers
  9.4 Describe the Effects of Various Decisions on Performance Evaluation of Responsibility Centers

      Why It Matters

   Lauren is a good cook who can make delicious meals quickly, and she enjoys cooking tremendously. Several
   friends have suggested she consider opening a food truck. She is intrigued by this idea and decides to further
   explore the possibility.
   After several years of research and planning, Lauren opens her food truck and finds instant success. She is so
   busy that she decides to recruit several others to join her in her food truck business. While this is an exciting
   next step, she has some questions about expanding the food truck concept. In particular, she wants to know if
   she can grow the business while maintaining the level of quality in her food that has led to her success.
   Since the concept of multiple food trucks is similar to the franchising concept, Lauren reaches out to a good
   friend who is the founder of a franchise that now has 10 regional locations. Her friend shares with her the
   concepts of a decentralized business and responsibility accounting. Under this approach, her friend tells her,
   she will be able to allow the individual food truck owners to have autonomy over their food truck while
   achieving the broader goals of financial success and serving quality food.
458                                                                               Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization

 9.1 Differentiate between Centralized and Decentralized Management

All businesses start with an idea. After putting the idea into action and forming the business, measuring the
performance of the business is a crucial next step for the business owners. As the business begins operations,
it is fairly easy for the entrepreneur to measure the performance because the owner is heavily involved in the
daily activities and decisions of the business. As the business grows through increased sales volume,
additional products and locations, and more employees, however, it becomes more complicated to measure
the performance of the organization. Owners and managers must design organizational systems that allow
for operational efficiency, performance measurement, and the achievement of organizational goals.
In this chapter, you will learn the difference between centralized and decentralized management and how that
relates to decision-making. You will learn about responsibility accounting and the type of decision-making
authority that may be granted through different responsibility centers. Finally, you will learn how certain types
of decisions have differing effects, depending on the type of responsibility center.

Management Control System

It is important for those studying business (and accounting, in particular) to understand the concept of a
management control system. A management control system is a structure within an organization that allows
managers to establish, implement, and monitor progress toward the strategic goals of the organization.
Establishing strategic goals within any organization is important. Strategic goals relate to all facets of the
business, including which markets to operate in, what products and services to offer to customers, and how to
recruit and retain a talented workforce. It is the responsibility of the organization's management to establish
strategic goals and to ensure that all activities of the business help meet goals.
Once an organization establishes its strategic goals, it must implement them. Implementing the strategic
goals of the organization requires communication and providing plans that guide the work of those in the
organization.
The final factor in creating a management control system is to design mechanisms to monitor the activities of
the organization to assess how well they are meeting the strategic goals. This aspect of the management
control system includes the accounting system (both financial and managerial). Monitoring the performance
of the organization allows management to repeat the activities that lead to good performance and to adjust
activities that are not supporting the strategic goals. In addition, monitoring the activities of the organization
provides feedback to management as to whether adjustments to the organization's strategy are necessary.
Establishing a management control system is very important to an organization. Organizations must
continually evaluate ways to improve and remain competitive in an ever-changing market. This requires the
organization to be both forward-looking (via strategic planning) and backward-looking (by evaluating what
has occurred), constantly monitoring performance and making necessary adjustments.

   CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

   Double Loop Learning

   In the fall of 1977, Harvard professor Chris Argyris wrote an article entitled "Double Loop Learning in

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization                                                     459

   Organizations." The article describes how organizations "learn," defined by Argyris as "a process of
   detecting and correcting error."[1] Argyris suggests there are two types of learning--single loop and
   double loop.
   Single loop learning is characterized as a system that evaluates the organization from the perspective of
   the organization's present policies. The result of single loop learning is binary: the organization is either
   meeting or not meeting the company's objectives. There is no further evaluation or additional
   information fed back into the management control system.
   Double loop learning, on the other hand, allows for a more comprehensive evaluation. In addition to
   evaluating whether or not the organization is meeting the current goals, double loop learning takes into
   consideration whether or not the current goals of the organization are relevant or should be adjusted in
   any way. That is, double loop learning requires organizations to evaluate the underlying assumptions
   that serves as the basis for establishing the current goals.
   Argyris's introduction of double loop learning has had a significant impact on the study of management
   and organizations. The concept of double loop learning also highlights how accounting systems, both
   financial and managerial, play a vital role in helping the organization attain its strategic goals.

Establishing effective management control systems is important for organizations of all sizes. It is important
for businesses to determine how they should structure the organization to ease decision-making and
subsequent evaluation. First, levels of management within an organization help the organization form a
structure that establishes levels of authority and roles within the organization. Lower-level management
provides basic supervision and oversight for the operations of the organization. Mid-level management
supervises and provides direction to lower-level management. Mid-level management often directs the various
departments or divisions within the organization. Mid-level managers receive direction and are responsible for
achieving the goals established by upper management. Upper management consists of the board of
directors and chief executives charged with providing strategic guidance for the organization. Upper
management has the ultimate authority within the organization and is accountable to the owners of the
organization.
Once a company establishes its management levels, it must determine whether the business is set up as
centralized or decentralized--opposite ends of a spectrum. Many businesses fall somewhere between the two
ends. Understanding the structures of both centralized and decentralized organizations provides a foundation
for understanding the variations in management accounting the organizations use.

   ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

   The Ethical Bakery Accountant

   Bakery accountant Keith Roberts worked at Archway & The Mother's Cookie Company as the director of
   finance. According to the New York Times, Roberts found himself perplexed by some numbers: "he knew

1 Chris Argyris "Double Loop Learning in Organizations." Harvard Business Review 55, no. 5 (1977): 115-116.
460                                                                               Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization

   things had been bad--daily reports he had been monitoring for six months showed that cookie sales at
   the company had been dismal. But the financial data he was looking at showed much more robust
   sales." He could not figure out where the sales were coming from, and after researching the accounting
   records, he determined that the company was booking nonexistent sales.
   Why? Roberts reasoned that sham transactions allowed Archway, which was owned by a private-equity
   firm, Catterton Partners, to maintain access to badly needed money from its lender, Wachovia. Roberts
   played a major role in alerting Archway's auditing firm of the possibility of accounting fraud. When
   challenged with the deceptive accounting, Roberts's supervisor invoked a crucial period in the business
   as a rationale for the unorthodox accounting for sales. Roberts finally quit his job and the accounting
   misstatements were brought to the attention of the bank and the auditors.

Centralized Organizations

Centralization is a business structure in which one individual makes the important decisions (such as
resource allocation) and provides the primary strategic direction for the company. Most small businesses are
centralized in that the owner makes all decisions regarding products, services, strategic direction, and most
other significant areas. However, a business does not have to be small to be centralized. Apple is an example
of a business with a centralized management structure. Within Apple, much of the decision-making
responsibility lies with the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) Tim Cook, who assumed the leadership role within
Apple following the death of Steve Jobs. Apple has long been viewed as an organization that maintains a high
level of centralized control over the company's strategic initiatives such as new product development, markets
to operate in, and company acquisitions. Many businesses in rapidly changing technological environments
have a centralized form of management structure. The decisions made by the lower level management are
limited in a centralized environment.
The advantages of centralized organizations include clarity in decision-making, streamlined implementation of
policies and initiatives, and control over the strategic direction of the organization. The primary disadvantages
of centralized organizations can include limited opportunities for employees to provide feedback and a higher
risk of inflexibility.

Decentralized Organizations

Decentralization is a business structure in which the decision-making is made at various levels of the
organization. Typically, decentralized businesses are divided into smaller segments or groups in order to make
it easier to measure the performance of the company and the individuals within each of the sub-groups.

Advantages of Decentralized Management

Many businesses operate in markets and industries that are highly competitive. In order to be successful, a
company must work hard to develop strategic competitive advantages that distinguish the company from its
peers. To accomplish this, the organizational structure must allow the organization to quickly adapt and take
advantage of opportunities. Therefore, many organizations adopt a decentralized management structure in

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization  461

order to maintain a competitive advantage.

There are numerous advantages of a decentralized management, such as:

  · Quick decision and response times--it is important for decisions to be made and implemented in a timely
      manner. In order to remain competitive, it is important for organizations to take advantage of
      opportunities that fit within the organization's strategy.

  · Better ability to expand company--it is important for organizations to constantly explore new
      opportunities to provide goods and services to its customers.

  · Skilled and/or specialized management--organizations must invest in developing highly skilled
      employees who are able to make sound decisions that help the organization achieve its goals.

  · Increased morale of employees--the success of an organization depends on its ability to obtain, develop,
      and retain highly motivated employees. Empowering employees to make decisions is one way to help
      increase employee morale.

  · Link between compensation and responsibility--promotional opportunities are often linked with a
      corresponding increase in compensation. In a decentralized organization, a compensation increase often
      corresponds to a commensurate increase in the responsibilities associated with learning new skills,
      increased decision-making authority, and supervision of other employees.

  · Better use of lower and middle management--many tasks must be performed in order to achieve success
      in an organization. Decentralized organizations often rely on lower and middle management to perform
      many of these tasks. This allows managers to gain valuable experience and expertise in different areas.

Disadvantages of Decentralized Management

While a decentralized organizational structure can be an advantage for many organizations, there are also
disadvantages to this type of structure, including:

  · Coordination problems--it is important for an organization to be working toward a common goal.
      Because decision-making is delegated in a decentralized organization, it is often difficult to ensure that all
      segments of the company are working in a consistent manner to achieve the strategic goals of the
      organization.

  · Increased administrative costs due to duplication of efforts--because similar decisions need to be made
      and activities undertaken across all divisions of an organization, decentralized organizations are
      susceptible to duplicating efforts, which results in inefficiency and increased costs.

  · Incongruity in operations--when autonomy is dispersed throughout the organization, as is the case in
      decentralized organizations, division managers may be tempted to customize/alter the operations of the
      division in an effort to maximize efficiency and suit the best interest of the division. In this structure, it is
      important to ensure the shortcuts taken by one division of the organization do not conflict with or disrupt
      the operations of another division within the organization.

  · Each department/division is often self-centered (its own fiefdom)--it is not uncommon for separate
      divisions within an organization to be measured on the performance of the division rather than of the
      entire company. In a decentralized organization, it is possible for division managers to prioritize divisional
      goal over organizational goals. Leaders of decentralized organizations should ensure the organization's
      goals remain the priority for all divisions to attain.

  · Significant, if not almost total, reliance on the divisional or department managers--because divisions
      within decentralized organizations have a high level of autonomy, the division may become operationally
      isolated from other divisions within the organization, focusing solely on the priorities of the division. If
462  Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization

       divisional or departmental managers do not have a wide breadth of experience or skills, the division may
       be at a disadvantage due to limited access to other expertise.

     CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

     Johnson & Johnson

     Johnson & Johnson was founded in 1886. The first factory had 14 employees: eight women and six men.[2]
     Today, Johnson & Johnson, employs over 125,000 associates and operates in over 60 countries. You may
     recognize some of Johnson & Johnson's products, which include Johnson's Baby Shampoo, Neutrogena,
     Band-Aid, Tylenol, Listerine, and Neosporin.
     William Weldon was Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of Johnson & Johnson from 2002 to 2012. Under
     Weldon's leadership, Johnson & Johnson operated under a decentralized structure. This interview on
     successfully operating a decentralized organization (https://openstax.org/l/50decentralized) shows it is
     clear that the key is the people within the organization. Weldon notes that to be successful, a
     decentralized organization must empower employees to innovate, develop expertise, and collaborate to
     achieve organizational goals.

Daily and Strategic Decision-Making

An underlying assumption is that businesses possess a single structure (either centralized or decentralized) at
any given point. That is not necessarily the case. For example, businesses often add employees who specialize
in the various needs of the organization. Over the life of an organization, it is not uncommon for businesses to
demonstrate aspects of both centralization and decentralization.
New businesses, for example, are often centralized. When a business first opens, it is common for the owner(s)
to be highly involved in the day-to-day operations. In addition, the small size of a new business allows the
owner to have a high level of involvement in both the daily and the strategic decisions of the business. Daily
decisions are ongoing, immediate decisions that must be made in order to effectively and efficiently meet the
needs of the organization's customers. Strategic decisions, on the other hand, are made fairly infrequently and
involve long-term goals of the organization. Being actively involved in the business allows new business
owners to gain experience in all aspects of the business so that they can get a sense of the patterns of the
daily operations and the decisions that need to be made. For example, the owner can be involved in
determining the number of workers needed to meet the day's production goal. Having too many workers
would be inefficient and require the company to incur unnecessary expenses. Having too few workers, on the
other hand, may result in inferior quality of products, missed shipments, or lost sales.
Additionally, an owner involved in daily operations has the opportunity to evaluate and, if necessary, alter any
strategic goals that may impact the daily operations. Strategic goals relate to all facets of the business,
including in which markets to operate, what products and services to offer to customers, how to recruit and
retain a talented workforce, and many other aspects of the business.
If an owner is involved in daily operations, an example of a potential strategic goal could be tha he or she can

2 "Our Story." Johnson & Johnson. https://ourstory.jnj.com/timeline

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization                                                    463

determine whether to pursue a cost leadership perspective. When pursuing a cost leadership perspective,
companies undertake activities to eliminate costs in order to produce a product or provide a service that has a
cost advantage compared to competing products or services. While providing a high-quality goods or service
is important to a company pursuing a cost leadership perspective, the competitive advantage of the company
is eliminating wasteful activities that add unnecessary costs, entering into strategic partnerships with suppliers
and other companies, and focusing on activities that allow the organization to offer the good or service at a
lower price than its competitors. Being highly involved in both the daily and strategic decisions can be very
beneficial as the business is established, but it is demanding on the business owner and, without adjustments,
often cannot be sustained.

As the business grows, management of a centralized organization faces a choice. Remaining highly involved in
the daily decisions of the business results in a low level of involvement in the strategic decisions of the
organization. While this may be effective in the short-term, the risks associated with not establishing and
adjusting long-term strategic goals increase. On the other hand, remaining highly involved in the strategic
decisions of the business results in a low level of involvement in the daily decisions of the business. This, too, is
risky because ineffectively managing daily business decisions may have long-term, negative consequences.

   ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

   Ethically Directed Strategic Management

   Managers in some organizations follow legal and regulatory requirements to operate their business at
   the lowest level of acceptable behavior in their business environment in order to keep costs low;
   however, some stakeholders may expect more than the minimum level of ethics. Stakeholders of
   business organizations are now insisting on higher ethical standards from their organizations.
   Stakeholders are any group or individual who may be affected by the organization's business decisions.
   Organizations providing high-quality goods and services need to consider all of their stakeholders when
   developing a strategic decision-making process to direct the organization's strategic decisions.

Another alternative for growing businesses is to move toward a decentralized operating structure. The
management of growing businesses with a decentralized structure has a low level of involvement in the daily
decisions of the business. Instead, management in these businesses focuses on strategic decisions that impact
the long-term success of the organization. The daily decisions are delegated to others, thereby allowing
management to focus on developing, implementing, and monitoring the firm's performance with respect to
the strategic goals of the business.

   THINK IT THROUGH

   Centralized Structure at Procter & Gamble

   The organizational chart shows the 10 product categories of Procter & Gamble.[3]

3 "Company Strategy." Procter & Gamble. http://www.pginvestor.com/Company-Strategy/Index?KeyGenPage=208821
464  Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization

   Review the different types of products that Procter & Gamble produces. Think of 2-3 instances where
   Procter & Gamble would adopt a centralized perspective in its operations. Why would this perspective be
   beneficial for Procter & Gamble? Don't forget to consider the ingredients used to make these products
   and how these products are sold to consumers.

 9.2 Describe How Decision-Making Differs between Centralized and
Decentralized Environments

Businesses are organized with the intention of creating efficiency and effectiveness in achieving organizational
goals. To aid in this, larger businesses use segments, uniquely identifiable components of the business. A
company often creates them because of the specific activities undertaken within a particular portion of the
business.[4] Segments are often categorized within the organization based on the services provided (i.e.,
departments), products produced, or even by geographic region. The purpose of identifying distinguishable
segments within an organization is to provide efficiency in decision-making and effectiveness in operational
performance.

Organizational Charts

Many organizations use an organizational chart to graphically represent the authority for decision-making
and oversight. Organizational charts are similar in appearance to flowcharts. An organizational chart for a
centralized organization is shown in Figure 9.2. The middle tier represents position held by individuals or
departments within the company. The lowest tier represents geographic locations in which the company
operates. The lines connecting the boxes indicate the relationship among the segments and branch from the
ultimate and decision-making authority. Organizational charts are typically arranged with the highest-ranking
person (or group) listed at the top.

4 In Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting, you learned that generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP)--also called accounting
standards--provide official guidance to the accounting profession. Under the oversight of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), GAAP
are created by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB). The official definition of segments as provided by FASB can be reviewed in ASC
280-10-50.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization  465

Figure 9.2 An Organizational Chart for a Centralized Organization. Centralized organizations have units that
report directly to one person. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Notice the organization depicted in Figure 9.2 has segments based on departments as well as geographic
regions. In addition, all lines connect directly to the president of the organization. This indicates that the
president is responsible for the oversight and decision-making for the production and sales departments as
well as the district (Northeast, Southwest, and Midwest) managers; essentially, the president has seven direct
reports. In this centralized organizational structure, all decision-making responsibility resides with the
president.
Figure 9.3 shows the same organization structured as a decentralized organization.

Figure 9.3 An Organizational Chart for a Decentralized Organization. Decentralized organizations have units
that report through intermediate management layers. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under
CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Notice that the organization depicted in Figure 9.3 has the same segments, which represent departments and
geographic regions. There are, however, noticeable differences between the centralized and decentralized
466                                                                               Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization

structure. Instead of seven direct reports, the president now oversees five direct reports, three of which are
based on geography--the Western, Southern, and Eastern regional managers. Notice, too, each regional
district manager is responsible for their respective production and sales departments. In this decentralized
organization, all decision-making responsibility does not reside with the president; regional decisions are
delegated to the three regional managers. Understand, however, that responsibility for achieving the
organization's goals still ultimately resides with the company president.

In a centralized environment, the major decisions are made at the top by the CEO and then are carried out by
everyone below the CEO. In a decentralized environment, the CEO sets the tone for the running of the
organization and provides some decision-making guidelines, but the actual decisions for the day-to-day
operations are made by the managers at the various levels of the organization. In other words, the essential
difference between centralized and decentralized organizations involves decision-making. While no
organization can be 100% centralized or 100% decentralized, organizations generally have a well-established
structure that outlines the decision-making authority within the organization.

   CONTINUING APPLICATION AT WORK

   Centralized vs. Decentralized Management

   Gearhead Outfitters was founded by Ted Herget in 1997 in a friend's living room in Jonesboro, AR. By
   2003, the business moved to its downtown location. In 2006, a second Jonesboro location was opened.
   Over the next several years, the company's growth allowed for expansion to several different cities, miles
   and hours away. Eventually Little Rock, AR, Fayetteville, AR, Shreveport, LA, Springfield, MO, and Tulsa, OK
   became home to Gearhead branches.

   With such growth, the company faced many management challenges. Would it be best for management
   to remain centralized with decision-making coming from a single location, or should the process be
   decentralized, allowing local management the flexibility and autonomy to run individual locations? If
   local management is given autonomy to make their own decisions, will those decisions be in line with
   company, or perhaps, individual goals? How will management be evaluated? Will inventory management
   be a uniform process, or will people and the process have to adapt to accommodate differences in
   demand at each location?

   These are just some of the hurdles that Gearhead needed to address. What are some other issues which
   Gearhead might have considered? Think in terms of inventory management, personnel, efficiencies, and
   leadership development. How could Gearhead have use decentralized management to grow and thrive?
   Conversely, what would the benefits of keeping all or some of the company's management decisions
   more centralized be?

How Does Decision-Making Differ in a Centralized versus a Decentralized Environment?

The CEO of a centralized organization will determine the direction of the company and determine how to get
the company to its goals. The steps necessary to reach these goals are then passed along to the lower-level
managers who carry out these steps and report back to the CEO. The CEO would then evaluate the results and

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization  467

incorporate any necessary operational changes. On the other hand, the CEO of a decentralized organization
will determine the goals of the company and either pass along the goals to the divisional managers for them
to determine how to reach these goals or work with the managers to determine the strategic plans and how to
meet the goals laid out by those plans. The divisional managers will then meet with the managers below them
to determine the best way to reach these goals. The lower-level managers are responsible for carrying out the
plan and reporting their results to the manager above them. The higher-level managers will combine the
results of several managers and evaluate those results before sending them to the divisional manager.

   THINK IT THROUGH

   Determining the Best Structure

   Here are some examples of decisions that every business must make:
      · Facility and equipment purchases and upgrades
      · Personnel decisions such as hiring and compensation
      · Products and services to offer, prices to charge customers, markets in which to operate

   For each decision listed, identify and explain the best structure (centralized, decentralized, or both) for
   each of the following types of businesses:

      · Auto manufacturer with multiple production departments
      · Florist shop (with three part-time employees) owned by a local couple
      · Law firm with four attorneys

 9.3 Describe the Types of Responsibility Centers

You've learned how segments are established within a business to increase decision-making and operational
effectiveness and efficiency. In other words, segments allow management to establish a structure of
operational accountability.

The terminology changes slightly when we think about accountability relating to the financial performance of
the segment. In a decentralized organization, the system of financial accountability for the various segments is
administered through what is called responsibility accounting.

Responsibility accounting is a basic component of accounting systems for many companies as their
performance measurement process becomes more complex. The process involves assigning the responsibility
of accounting for particular segments of the company to a specific individual or group. These segments are
often structured as responsibility centers in which designated supervisors or managers will have both the
responsibility for the performance of the center and the authority to make decisions that affect the center.

Often, businesses will use the segment structure to establish the responsibility accounting framework. You
might think of segments and responsibility centers as two sides of the same coin: segments establish the
structure for operational accountability whereas responsibility centers establish the structure for financial
accountability. Both segments and responsibility centers (which will likely be the same) attempt to accomplish
the same goal: ensure all sectors of the business achieve the organization's strategic goals.

Before learning about the five types of responsibility centers in detail, it is important to understand the
468                                                                               Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization

essence of responsibility accounting and responsibility centers.

Fundamentals of Responsibility Accounting and Responsibility Centers

Recall the discussion of management control systems. These systems allow management to establish,
implement, monitor, and adjust the activities of the organization toward attainment of strategic goals.
Responsibility accounting and the responsibility centers framework focuses on monitoring and adjusting
activities, based on financial performance. This framework allows management to gain valuable feedback
relating to the financial performance of the organization and to identify any segment activity where
adjustments are necessary.

Types of Responsibility Centers

Organizations must exercise care when establishing responsibility centers. In a responsibility accounting
framework, decision-making authority is delegated to a specific manager or director of each segment. The
manager or director will, in turn, be evaluated based on the financial performance of that segment or
responsibility center. It is important, therefore, to establish a responsibility accounting framework that allows
for an adequate and equitable evaluation of the financial performance of the responsibility center (and, by
default, the manager of the responsibility center) as well as the attainment of the organization's strategic
goals.

This is not an easy task. There are several factors that organizations must consider when developing and using
a responsibility accounting framework. Before discussing those factors, let's explore the five types of
responsibility centers: cost centers, discretionary cost centers, revenue centers, profit centers, and investment
centers.

Cost Centers

A cost center is an organizational segment in which a manager is held responsible only for costs. In these
types of responsibility centers, there is a direct link between the costs incurred and the product or services
produced. This link must be recognized by managers and properly structured within the responsibility
accounting framework.

An example of a cost center is the custodial department of a department store called Apparel World. On one
hand, since the custodial department is structured as a cost center, the goal of the custodial department
manager is to keep costs as low as possible, since this is the basis by which the manager will be evaluated by
upper-level management. On the other hand, the custodial department manager, who is responsible for
cleaning the store entrances, also wants to keep the store as clean as possible for the store's customers. If the
store appears unclean and disorganized, customers will not continue to shop at the store. Therefore, the
custodial department manager and upper-level management must work together to establish goals of the
cost center (the custodial department, in this example) that satisfy the strategic goals of the
business--maintaining a clean and organized store while minimizing the costs of managing the custodial
department.

Figure 9.4 shows an example of what the cost center report might look like for the Apparel World custodial
department.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization  469

Figure 9.4 Cost Center Report for the Custodial Department. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Let's use this report to explore how the department manager and upper-level management might review and
use this information. In total, in December, the custodial department incurred $980 more of actual expenses
than budgeted (or expected) expenses. This represents a 5.2% increase in expenses than was expected.

Notice the terminology used to describe the financial information of the custodial department: the
department "incurred $980 more of actual expenses," rather than the department "spent $980 more of actual
expenses." Recall from Introduction to Financial Statements (http://cnx.org/content/m67837/latest/) that
financial statements are typically prepared using accrual accounting rather than cash accounting. Under
accrual accounting, certain transactions are recorded regardless of when the cash is exchanged. Therefore, to
say the custodial department "spent $19,725" or "spent $980 more for expenses" would technically be
incorrect, since the cash may not have been spent.

The managers would then review each line item to determine what caused the $980 increase in expenses over
what was expected. Keep in mind, the $980 represents the total overage from the budget, so it is possible that
some expense accounts could have actually been below expectations. Unfortunately, that is not the case in the
month of December because every line item, with the exception of department manager wages, exceeded the
budgeted amount. It was no surprise to management that the department manager's wages were exactly as
expected. Even though the custodial department manager worked more hours in the month of December, the
manager is a salaried employee, so the wages are the same regardless of the number of hours worked.

Upon further investigation, it was determined that in December, the town where the Apparel World store is
located received an unusually high amount of snow. This had an impact on each of the expense amounts in
the custodial department. Because of the need to shovel snow more often, some of the custodial staff had to
work overtime to ensure customers could easily and safely enter the store. This led to an increase in custodial
wages of $500 compared to the budgeted or expected amount, which was established based on the previous
year, when snowfall in the area was closer to average.

The research conducted by management also identified that additional cleaning equipment (mop buckets,
mops, and "wet floor" signs) were purchased. The increased snowfall also led to the purchase of more salt
than usual for the sidewalks outside the store. Because it was important to promptly clean the snow as well as
the salt that was brought into the store on customers' shoes, additional equipment was purchased so that
each entrance would have a mop and bucket. The custodial department manager decided this was the best
course of action. Normally, the store uses a single mop and bucket to clean all entrances. This would have
taken more time and increased the risk of an accident.
470                                                                               Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization

The increased application of salt partially explains the 129.2% (or $155) overage in the cleaning supplies
expense account. Management has learned that the overage in this account was also caused by an increase in
purchases of mop head replacements, floor cleaner, and paper towels.

After reviewing the December information and learning the causes of the increased expenses, the company
determined that no corrective action was necessary going forward. The area received an unusually high level
of snowfall that year, which was not something the custodial department manager could control. In fact, the
upper-level managers praised the custodial department manager for taking action that was in the best
interest of the store and its customers. The managers commented that they had received numerous
compliments from customers regarding how easy and safe it was to enter the store compared to other local
stores. The manager noted that, despite the increased snowfall, store sales were higher than expected and
attributed much of the success to the work of the custodial department.

Discretionary Cost Centers

A discretionary cost center is similar to a cost center, with one distinguishing factor. A discretionary cost
center is an organizational segment in which a manager is held responsible for controllable costs when there
is not a well-defined relationship between the center's costs and its services or products. Examples include
human resources and accounting departments. Human resources departments often establish policies that
affect the entire organization. For instance, while a policy requiring all workers to have annual safety training
for fires, injuries, and tornadoes is beneficial to the entire company, it is difficult to evaluate the human
resources department manager's performance in relation to impacting the products or services the company
provides. As you might expect, reviewing the financial performance of a discretionary cost center is similar to
that of the review of a cost center.

Revenue Centers

A revenue center is an organizational segment in which a manager is held accountable only for revenues. As
the name implies, the goal of a revenue center is to generate revenues for the business. In order to
accomplish the goal of increasing revenues, the manager of a revenue center would focus on developing
specific skillsets of the revenue center's employees. The reservations group of Southwest Airlines is an
example of a segment that may be structured as a revenue center. The employees should be well-trained in
providing excellent customer service, handling customer complaints, and converting customer interactions
into actual sales. As the financial performance of cost centers and discretionary cost centers is similar, so is the
financial performance of a revenue center and a cost center.

Profit Centers

A profit center is an organizational segment in which a manager is responsible for both revenues and costs
(such as a Starbucks store location). Of the responsibility centers explored so far, a profit center structure is
the most complex because a manager must be well-versed in techniques to increase revenues, decrease
expenses, and thereby increase profits while also meeting the strategic goals of the organization.

Let's return to the Apparel World department store. Figure 9.5 shows an example of what the profit center
report might look like for the Apparel World children's clothing department.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization  471

Figure 9.5 Profit Center Report for the Children's Clothing Department. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Just as with the cost center, let's walk through an analysis of the December children's clothing department
profit center report. Overall, the department's actual profit exceeded budgeted profit by $3,891, or 13.5%,
compared to budgeted (or expected) profit. This increase was driven by a total revenue increase over budget
by $29,200 or 19.8%. Recall from Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting that variable costs, unlike fixed
costs, change in proportion to the level of activity in a business. Therefore, it should be no surprise that the
expenses in the children's clothing department also increased. In fact, the expenses increased $25,309 (or
21.4%) versus the budgeted amount. The revenues of the department increased $29,200, while expenses
increased $25,309, yielding an increase in profit of $3,891 over expectations.

The increase in revenue could be further analyzed. Because the store also sells accessories such as belts and
socks, the children's clothing department tracks two revenue sources (also called streams)--clothing and
accessories. Management was pleased to learn that clothing revenue exceeded expectations by $30,000, or
20.7%. Given the higher-than-usual level of snowfall in the area, this is an impressive increase, and the
company can attribute a portion of the successful month to the employees of the custodial department, who
worked extra hard to ensure customers could easily and safely enter the store.

The overall revenue of the department increased by $29,200. Since the clothing department revenue increased
by $30,000, the clothing accessories revenue stream must have experienced a decline in revenue. In fact, the
accessories revenue dropped by 36.4%. While this is a large percentage, consider the fact that the actual value
of revenue decline was relatively minor--only $800 lower (as indicated by the negative amount) than expected.
This indicates the employees may not have encouraged customers to also get belts or socks with their clothing
purchase. This is an opportunity for the department manager to remind employees to encourage customers
to purchase accessories to complement the clothing purchases. Overall, the increase in revenue attained by
the children's clothing department is a highlight for the store.

A review of the department's expenses shows increases in all expenses, except department manager wages
and cost of accessories sold. When reviewing the profit center report, pay special attention to how the
differences between the actual and budgeted expenses are calculated in this analysis. In the revenue section, a
472                                                                               Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization

positive number indicates the revenue exceeded the budgeted amount, which means a favorable financial
performance. In the expense section, a positive number indicates the expense exceeded the budgeted
amount, which means an unfavorable financial performance.

As with the custodial department manager, the manager of the children's clothing department is also a
salaried employee, so the wages do not change each month--the wages are a fixed cost for the department.
Since the clothing accessories revenue declined, the cost of accessories also declined. The accessories
expenses were $576 lower than expected. While this appears to be good news for the department, recall that
clothing accessories revenue dropped by $800. Therefore, the department profit margin decreased by a net
amount of $224 versus expectations ($800 revenue decline and a corresponding expense decrease of $576).

All other actual expenses were over budget, as indicated by the positive numbers. Remember, these are
expenses, and in this analysis, they indicate unfavorable financial performance. It probably comes as no
surprise that all of the expense overages are a result of the increased sales. Because of the increased sales,
more associates were needed to cover each shift, and they worked more hours to cover the longer store
hours, which caused wages to go over budget. The substantial increase in clothing revenue also caused the
cost of clothing sold to increase proportionately. Similarly, the increased sales drove an increase in equipment/
fixture repairs of $735 (or 253.4%) over budget due to repairs to cash registers and clothing racks. Because the
store was open longer hours during the holiday season, the utilities expenses also exceeded budget by $275,
or 44.4%.

Overall, the Apparel World department store management was pleased with the December financial
performance of the children's clothing department. The department exceeded budgeted sales, which resulted
in an increase in department profitability. The review also highlighted an area for improvement in the
department--increasing accessory sales--which is easily corrected through additional training.

Notice that the review of the children's clothing department profit center report discussed differences
measured in both dollars and percentages. When analyzing financial information, looking only at dollar values
can be misleading. Displaying information as percentages--percentage of an entire amount or percentage
change--standardizes the information and facilitates an easier and more accurate comparison, especially
when dealing with segments (or companies) with vastly different sizes.

Let's look at another scenario using Apparel World. The example so far has explored the financial performance
review processes for a cost center and a profit center. Now assume that store management wants to compare
two different profit centers--children's clothing and women's clothing. Figure 9.6 shows the December
financial information for the children's clothing department, and Figure 9.7 shows the financial information for
the women's clothing department.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization  473

Figure 9.6 Profit Center Report for the Children's Clothing Department, without Percentages. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Figure 9.7 Profit Center Report for the Women's Clothing Department, without Percentages. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Comparing the dollar differences in the two departments, notice that the children's clothing department is a
smaller department, as measured by total revenue, than the women's clothing department.
Now, let's compare the differences in the two departments by looking at the percentages. The children's
clothing department financial information is shown in Figure 9.8, and the women's clothing department
financial information is shown in Figure 9.9.
474  Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization

Figure 9.8 Profit Center Report for the Children's Clothing Department. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Figure 9.9 Profit Center Report for the Women's Clothing Department. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Does the comparison change when the dollar differences are shown as percentages? Which department was
more effective at strengthening the store's financial position? Which department was more efficient with the
December revenue? What other factors might the Apparel World management consider?
Adding the percentages to the financial analysis allows managers to more directly make comparisons, to
separate departments in this case. Simply reviewing the dollar differences can be misleading because of size
differences between the departments being compared. The Women's Department added more value ($61,113)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization  475

to the store's financial position, while the Children's Department was more efficient, converting 13.5% (or
$0.135) of every dollar of revenue to profit.

Investment Centers

It is important for managers to continually invest in the business. Managers must choose investments that
improve the value of the business by improving the customer experience, increasing customer loyalty, and,
ultimately, increasing the value of the organization. A limitation of the centers explored so far--cost center,
discretionary cost center, revenue center, and profit center--is that these structures do not account for the
investments made by the various responsibility center managers. The final responsibility center--investment
centers--takes into account and evaluates the investments made by the responsibility center managers. The
goal of the investment center structure is to ensure that segment managers choose investments that add
value and help the organization achieve its strategic goals.

An investment center is an organizational segment (such as the northern region of Best Buy or the food
trucks used in the Why It Matters opening case) in which a manager is accountable for profits (revenues minus
expenses) and the invested capital used by the segment.

   CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

   Research and Development at Hershey's

   As you know by now, financial statements tell users what has occurred in the past--the statements
   provide feedback value. Responsibility accounting is no exception--it is a system that measures the
   financial performance of what has already occurred and provides management with a measure of past
   events.

   Have you ever considered how companies measure the outcome of activities that have not yet occurred?
   As you've learned, many companies invest in research and development activities to determine how to
   improve existing products and to create entirely new products or processes.

   The Hershey Chocolate Company is one company that invests heavily in research and development.
   Hershey's has created an Advanced Technology & Foresight Lab, which looks for innovative ways to bring
   chocolate to the market.

   Here are some of the innovative things that Hershey's has developed:

      · Sourcemap--an interactive, web-based tool to show consumers where the ingredients in their
          favorite Hershey's snack, such as Hershey's Milk Chocolate with Almonds Bar (https://openstax.org/
          l/50HersheyMap) comes from. There is also a video and short story for each point on the interactive
          map (https://openstax.org/l/50HersheyVideo) for more information.

      · SmartLabel--a scanable label on each Hershey's product that gives the user up-to-date ingredient,
          allergen, and other information.

      · Chocolate made inside the package--Hershey's developed this process to form a piece of chocolate
          (https://openstax.org/l/50HersheyChoco) inside the package.

      · 3D Chocolate Printing--using a 3D printer, Hershey's has developed an innovative way to create
          customized chocolate candies.[5]
476  Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization

     Measuring the financial success of innovations such as these is nearly impossible in the short-run.
     However, in the long-run, investments in product development help companies like Hershey's increase
     sales, reduce costs, gain market share, and remain competitive in the marketplace.

There are numerous methods used to evaluate the financial performance of investment centers. When
discussing profit centers, we used the segment's profit/loss stated in dollars. Another method to evaluate
segment financial performance involves using the profit margin percentage.

The profit margin percentage is calculated by taking the net profit (or loss) divided by the net sales. This is a
useful calculation to measure the organization's (or segment's) efficiency at converting revenue into profit
(net income). While the dollar value of a segment's profit/loss is important, the advantage of using a
percentage is that percentages allow for more direct comparisons of different-sized segments.

Let's return to the Apparel World example and look at the profit margin percentage for the children's and
women's clothing departments. Figure 9.10 shows the December financial information for the children's
clothing department, including the profit margin percentage.

Figure 9.10 Profit Center Report for the Children's Clothing Department, Including Profit Margin
Percentage. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

The actual profit margin percentage achieved by the children's clothing department was 18.5%, calculated by
taking the department profit of $32,647 divided by the total revenue of $176,400 ($32,647 / $176,400). The
actual profit margin percentage was slightly lower than the expected percentage of 19.5% ($28,756 / $147,200).
To determine why the profit margin percentage slipped slightly compared to expectations, management could
compare the actual revenue and expenses with the budgeted revenue and expenses using a vertical analysis,
as shown in Financial Statement Analysis. Doing so would highlight the fact that the cost of clothing sold as a

5 Sue Gleiter. "Hershey Company Goes Futuristic with 3-D Printed Chocolates." PennLive. https://www.pennlive.com/food/index.ssf/2014/12/
hersheys_3-d_chocolate.html

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization  477

percentage of clothing revenue increased significantly compared to what was expected. Management would
want to explore this further, looking at factors influencing both clothing revenue (sales prices and quantity)
and the cost of the clothing (which may have increased).

Figure 9.11 shows the December financial information for the women's clothing department, including the
profit margin percentage.

Figure 9.11 Profit Center Report for the Women's Clothing Department, Including Profit Margin Percentage.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

The actual profit margin percentage of the women's clothing department was 14.6%, calculated by taking the
department profit of $61,113 divided by the total revenue of $417,280 ($61,113 / $417,280). The actual profit
margin percentage was significantly lower than the expected percentage of 18.2% ($58,580 / $322,300). As with
the children's clothing department, a vertical analysis indicates the significant decrease from budgeted profit
margin percentage was a result of the cost of clothing sold. This would lead management to investigate
possible causes that would have influenced the clothing revenue (sales prices and quantity), the cost of the
clothing, or both.

Another method used to evaluate investment centers is called return on investment. Return on investment
(ROI) is the department or segment's profit (or loss) divided by the investment base (Net Income / Base). It is
a measure of how effective the segment was at generating profit with a given level of investment. Another way
to think about ROI is its use as a measure of leverage. That is, the return on investment calculation measures
how much profit the segment can realize per dollar invested.

Several points are in order regarding the definition of return on investment. In practice, the numerator
(segment profit or loss) may have different names, depending upon the terms used by the organization. Some
organizations may call this value net income (or loss) or operating income (or loss). These terms relate to the
financial performance of the segment, and each organization decides how best to identify and quantify
financial performance.
478                                                                               Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization

Another significant point in the definition of return on investment relates to the denominator (investment
base). There is no uniform definition of "investment base" within the accounting/finance profession. Some
organizations define investment base as operating assets, while others define the investment base as average
operating assets. Other organizations use the book value of assets, and still others use the historical or even
replacement cost of assets. There are valid arguments for all of these definitions for investment base. It is
important not to be confused by these variations but instead to know the definition in a particular context and
to use it consistently. For our purposes, the denominator in the return on investment formula will be
"investment base," and the value will be provided.

Finally, you may recall from Long-Term Assets (http://cnx.org/content/m67894/latest/) that accountants
carefully consider where to place certain costs (either on the balance sheet as assets or on the income
statement as expenses). While ROI typically deals with long-lived assets such as buildings and equipment that
are charged to the balance sheet, the ROI approach also applies to certain "investments" that are expensed.
For instance, advertising costs are expensed. If a segment is considering an advertising campaign,
management would assess the effectiveness of the advertising campaign in a similar manner as the traditional
ROI analysis using large, capitalized investments. That is, management would want to assess the additional
revenue (or profit) derived from the advertising campaign (which would be the numerator in the ROI
calculation) compared to the investment or cost of the advertising campaign (which would be the
denominator in the ROI calculation). To illustrate, let's say management was able to identify that an
advertising campaign costing $2,500 brought in an additional $500 of profit. This would be a 20% return on
investment ($500 / $2,500).

A return on investment analysis of an investment center begins with the same information as an analysis of a
profit center. To explore return on investment, let's return to the December Apparel World profit center
information analyzing the children's and women's clothing departments. Assume that a smaller store in
another location had the following profit for December:

  · Children's clothing department: $3,891
  · Women's clothing department: $2,533

Now assume that each department had an investment base of the following amounts:

  · Children's clothing department: $15,000
  · Women's clothing department: $65,000

To calculate the return on investment (ROI) for each department, divide the segment profit by the segment
investment base. The ROI for each department is:

  · Children's clothing department: 25.9% ($3,891 / $15,000)
  · Women's clothing department: 3.9% ($2,533 / $65,000)

The children's clothing department contributed the most to the financial position of this Apparel World
location ($3,891 vs. $2,533). In addition, the children's clothing department was able to better leverage every
dollar invested into profit. Stated differently, for every dollar invested, the children's clothing department was
able to realize $0.259 of profit while the women's clothing department realized only $0.039 of profit for every
dollar invested.

It is also significant that the children's clothing department requires a smaller dollar value of investment. This
conserves store resources (financial capital) and helps store management prioritize and efficiently allocate
future resources. By investing in the children's clothing department, store management is able to invest a
smaller dollar amount while achieving a higher rate of return (profitability) on that investment.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization  479

One of the criticisms of the ROI approach is that each segment evaluates potential investments only in relation
to the individual segment's ROI. This may cause the individual segment manager to select only projects or
activities that improve the individual segment's ROI and decline projects that improve the financial position of
the overall company. Most often, segment managers are primarily evaluated based on the performance of the
segment they manage with only a small portion, if any, of their evaluation based on overall corporate
performance. This means that the bonuses of a segment manager are largely dependent on how the segment
performs, or in other words, based on the decisions made by that segment manager. A manager may choose
to forgo a project or activity because it will lower the segment's ROI even though the project would benefit the
entire company. ROI and the many implications of its use are explained further and demonstrated in Balanced
Scorecard and Other Performance Measures.

The final investment center evaluation method, residual income (RI), structures the investment selection
process to incentivize segment managers to select projects that benefit the entire company, rather than only
the specific segment.

   YOUR TURN

   Analyzing Historical Success

   Companies want to be sure the investments they make are generating an acceptable return. Additonally,
   individual investors want to ensure they are receiving the highest financial return for the money they are
   investing.

   This article published in the New York Times on best investments (https://openstax.org/l/50Microsoft)
   listed Microsoft as having one of the best investments since 1926 (based on a study by Hendrik
   Bessembinder). Based on stock market returns to investors, Microsoft ranked third, behind ExxonMobil
   and Apple. According to the article, "since 1986, it has had an annualized return of 25 percent."

   Other companies in the ranking included familiar company names such as General Electric (ranked #4),
   Walmart (ranked #10), McDonald's (#31), and Coca-Cola (#15).

   But does historical success ensure future success? General Electric is listed in the article as the 4th
   highest-ranking company for creating wealth for investors. Conduct internet research to find out the
   condition of General Electric today. What do you think the future holds for General Electric?

   As the world-wide economy changes, General Electric seems to be struggling to evolve, and this issue
   potentially leaves them with an uncertain future.

Residual income (RI) establishes a minimum level that all investments must attain in order to be accepted by
management. This minimum acceptable level is defined as a dollar value and is applicable to all departments
or segments of the business. Residual income is calculated by taking the segment income less the product of
the investment value and cost of capital percentage. The formula is:

As with the return on investment calculation, income can be defined as segment operating income (or loss) or
segment profit (or loss). Some organizations may use different terms. In RI scenarios, the investment refers to
480                                                                               Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization

a specific project the segment is considering. Investment, in RI calculations, should not be confused with the
total investment base, which was used in the ROI calculation. Finally, the cost of capital, which is covered in
Short-Term Decision-Making, refers to the rate at which the company raises (or earns) capital. Essentially, the
cost of capital can be considered the same as the interest rate at which the company can borrow funds
through a bank loan. By establishing a standard cost of capital rate used by all segments of the company, the
company is establishing a minimum investment level that all investment opportunities must achieve. For
example, assume a company can borrow funds from a local bank at an interest rate of 10%. The company,
then, does not want a segment accepting an investment opportunity that earns anything less than 10%.
Therefore, the company will establish a threshold--the cost of capital percentage--that will be used to screen
potential investments. At the same time, under the residual income structure, managers of the individual
segments (also called responsibility centers) will be incentivized to undertake investments that benefit not
only the segment but also the entire company. Recall that the ROI of the children's clothing department was
25.9% ($3,891 profit / $15,000 investment). Under an ROI analysis, the manager of the children's clothing
department would not accept an investment that earns less than 25.9% because the rate of return would be
negatively impacted, even though the company may benefit. Under a residual income structure, managers
would accept all investments with a positive value because the investment would exceeded the investment
threshold established by the company.

Let's look at an example. Recall that the children's clothing department of Apparel World had an investment
base of $15,000. Assuming the cost of capital (understood as the rate of a bank loan) to Apparel World is 10%.
This is the rate that Apparel World will also set as the rate it expects all responsibility centers to earn.
Therefore, in the example, the expected amount of residual value--the profit goal, in a sense--for the
children's clothing department is $1,500 ($15,000 investment base × 10% cost of capital). Management is
pleased with the December performance of the children's clothing department because it earned a profit of
$3,891, well in excess of the $1,500 goal.

Now let's examine how the manager of the children's clothing department would evaluate a potential
investment opportunity. Assume in December the manager had an opportunity to invest to upgrade the store
by adding a supervised children's play area for children to use while parents shopped. The manager believes
this enhancement might increase sales because parents could take their time shopping, while knowing their
children are safe and having fun. The upgrade would make the customer shopping experience more enjoyable
for everyone.

The children's play area requires an investment of $50,000 and the expected increase in income as a result of
the children's play area is $5,001. Because the Apparel World store has a cost of capital requirement of 10%,
the manager would invest in the children's play area because the residual income on this investment would be
positive. To be precise, the residual income is $1. Using the residual income formula, the residual income is
$5,001 - ($50,000 × 10%) = $1.

While this is an exaggerated and oversimplified example, it is intended to highlight the fact that, as long as
resources (funds) are available to invest, a responsibility manager will (or should) accept projects that have a
positive residual value. In this example, the children's clothing department would be in a better financial
position by undertaking this project than if they rejected this project. The department earned $3,891 of profit
in December but would have earned, based on the estimates, $3,892 if the department added the children's
play area.

The benefit of a residual income approach is that all investments in all segments of the organization are
evaluated using the same approach. Instead of having each segment select only investments that benefit only

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization                                                    481

the segment, the residual income approach guides managers to select investments that benefit the entire
organization.

 9.4 Describe the Effects of Various Decisions on Performance Evaluation of
Responsibility Centers

Organizations incur various types of costs using decentralization and responsibility accounting, and they need
to determine how the costs relate to particular segments of the organization within the responsibility
accounting framework. One way to categorize costs is based on the level of autonomy the organization (or
responsibility center manager) has over the costs. Controllable costs are costs that a company or manager
can influence. Examples of controllable costs include the wages paid to employees of the company, the cost of
training provided to employees, and the cost of maintaining buildings and equipment. As it relates to
controllable costs, managers have a fair amount of discretion. While managers may choose to reduce
controllable costs like the examples listed, the long-term implications of reducing certain controllable costs
must be considered. For example, suppose a manager chooses to reduce the costs of maintaining buildings
and equipment. While the manager would achieve the short-term goal of reducing expenses, it is important to
also consider the long-term implications of those decisions. Often, deferring routine maintenance costs leads
to a greater expense in the long-term because once the building or equipment ultimately needs repairs, the
repairs will likely be more extensive, expensive, and time-consuming compared to investments in routine
maintenance.

   THINK IT THROUGH

   The Frequency of Maintenance

   If you own your own vehicle, you may have been advised (maybe all too often) to have your vehicle
   maintained through routine oil changes, inspections, and other safety-related checks. With
   advancements in technology in both car manufacturing and motor oil technology, the recommended
   mileage intervals between oil changes has increased significantly. If you ask some of your family
   members how often to change the oil in your vehicle, you might get a wide range of answers--including
   both time-based and mileage-based recommendations. It is not uncommon to hear that oil should be
   changed every three months or 3,000 miles. An article from the Edmunds.com website devoted to
   automobiles (https://openstax.org/l/50YourOil) suggests automobile manufacturers are extending the
   recommended intervals between oil changes to up to 15,000 miles.

   Do you know what the recommendation is for changing the oil in the vehicle you drive? Why do you think
   the recommendations have increased from the traditonal 3,000 miles to longer intervals? How might a
   business apply these concepts to the concept of maintaining and upgrading equipment? If you were the
   accountant for a business, what factors would you recommend management consider when making the
   decisions on how frequently to maintain equipment and how big of a priority should equipment
   maintenace be?

The goal of responsibility center accounting is to evaluate managers only on the decisions over which they
have control. While many of the costs that managers will encounter are controllable, other costs are
482                                                                               Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization

uncontrollable and originate from within the organization. Uncontrollable costs are those costs that the
organization or manager has little or no ability to influence (in the short-term, at least) and therefore should
not be incorporated into the analysis of either the manager or the segment's performance. Examples of
uncontrollable costs include the cost of electricity the company uses, the cost per gallon of fuel for a
company's delivery trucks, and the amount of real estate taxes charged by the municipalities in which the
company operates. While there are some long-term ways that companies can influence these costs, the
examples listed are generally considered uncontrollable.

One category of uncontrollable costs is allocated costs. These are costs that are often allocated (or charged)
to the segments within the organization based on some allocation formula or process, such as the costs of
receiving support from corporate headquarters. These costs cannot be controlled by the responsibility center
manager and thus should not be considered when that manager is being evaluated. Costs relevant to
decision-making and financial performance evaluation will be further explored in Short-Term Decision-Making.

Effects of Decisions on Performance Evaluation of Responsibility Centers

Suppose, as the manager of the maintenance department of a major airline, you become aware of a training
session that is available to your mechanics. The disadvantages are that the training will require the mechanics
to miss an entire week of work and the associated costs (travel, lodging, training session) are high. The
advantage is that, as a result of the training, the time during which the planes are grounded for repairs will
significantly decrease. What factors would influence your decision regarding whether or not to send
mechanics to school? Considering the fact that each mechanic would miss an entire week of work, what
factors would you consider in determining how many mechanics to send? Do these factors align with or
conflict with what is best for the company or you as the department manager? Is there a way to quantify the
investment in the training compared to the benefit of quicker repairs for the airplanes?

Scenarios such as this are common for managers of the various responsibility centers--cost, discretionary
cost, revenue, profit, and investment centers. Managers must be well-versed at using both financial and
nonfinancial information to make decisions such as these in order to do what is best for the organization.

   ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

   Pro-Stakeholder Culture Opens Business Opportunities

   The use of pro-stakeholder decision-making by managers in their responsibility centers allows managers
   to determine alternatives that are both profitable and follow stakeholders' ethics-related demands. In an
   essay in Business Horizons, Michael Hitt and Jamie Collins explain that companies with a pro-stakeholder
   culture should better understand the multiple ethical demands of those stakeholders. They also argue
   that this understanding should "provide these firms with an advantage in recognizing economic
   opportunities associated with such concerns."[6] The identification of these opportunities can make a
   manager's decisions more profitable in the long run.

   Hitt and Collins go on to argue that "as products and services may be developed in response to
   consumers' desires, stakeholders' ethical expectations can, in fact, represent latent signals on emerging
   economic opportunities."[7] Providing managers the ability to identify alternatives based upon

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization                                                                                    483

   stakeholders' desires and demands gives them a broader decision-making platform that allows for
   decisions that are in the best interest of the organization.

Often one of the most challenging decisions a manager must make relates to transfer pricing, which is the
pricing process put into place when one segment of a business "sells" goods to another segment of the same
business. In order to understand the significance of transfer pricing, recall that the primary goal of a
responsibility center manager is to manage costs and make decisions that contribute to the success of the
company. In addition, often the financial performance of the segment impacts the manager's compensation,
through bonuses and raises, which are likely tied to the financial performance of the segment. Therefore, the
decisions made by the manager will affect both the manager and the company.

Application of Transfer Pricing

Transfer pricing can affect goal congruence--alignment between the goals of the segment or responsibility
center, or even an individual manager, with the strategic goals of the organization. Recall what you've learned
regarding segments of the business. Often, segments will be arranged by the type of product produced or
service offered. Segments often sell products to external customers. For example, assume a soft drink
company has a segment--called the blending department--dedicated to producing various types of soft
drinks. The company may have an external customer to which it sells unique soft drink flavors that the
customer will bottle under a different brand name (perhaps a store brand like Kroger or Meijer). The segment
may also produce soft drinks for another segment within its own company--the bottling department, for
example--for further processing and ultimate sale to external customers. When the internal transfer occurs
between the blending segment and the bottling segment, the transaction will be structured as a sale for the
blending segment and as a purchase for the bottling department. To facilitate the transaction, the company
will establish a transfer price, even though the transaction is internal because each segment is responsible for
its own profits and costs.

Figure 9.12 shows a graphical representation of the transfer pricing structure for the soft drink company used
in the example.

Figure 9.12 Transfer Pricing. The sale for the Blending Department is the purchase for the Bottling
Department. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

6 Michael Hitt and Jamie Collins "Business Ethics, Strategic Decision Making, and Firm Performance." Business Horizons 50, no. 5 (February
2007): 353-357.
7 Michael Hitt and Jamie Collins "Business Ethics, Strategic Decision Making, and Firm Performance." Business Horizons 50, no. 5 (February
2007): 353-357.
484                                                                               Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization

Notice that the blending department has two categories of customers--external and internal. External
customers purchase the soft drink mixtures and bottle the drinks under a different label, such as a store
brand. Internally, the blending department "sells" the soft drink mixtures to the bottling department. Notice
the "sale" by the blending department (a positive amount) and the "purchase" by the bottling department (a
negative amount) net out to zero. This transaction does not impact the overall financial performance of the
organization and allows the responsibility center managers to analyze the financial performance of the
segment just as if these were transactions involving outside entities.

What issues might this scenario cause as it relates to goal congruence--that is, meeting the goals of the
corporation as a whole as well as meeting the goals of the individual managers?

In situations where the selling division, in this case the blending division, has excess capacity--meaning they
can produce more than they currently sell--and ignoring goal congruence issues, the selling division would
sell its products internally for variable cost. If there is no excess capacity, though, the opportunity cost of the
contribution margin given up by taking internal sales instead of external sales would need to be considered.
Let's look at each of these general situations individually.

In the case of excess capacity, the selling division has the ability to produce the goods to sell internally with
only variable costs increasing. Thus, it seems logical to make transfer price the same as the variable costs--but
is it? Reflecting back on the concept of responsibility centers, the idea is to allow management to have
decision-making authority and to evaluate and reward management based on how well they make decisions
that lead to increased profitability for their segment. These managers are often rewarded with bonuses or
other forms of compensation based on how well they reach certain profitability measures. Does selling goods
at variable cost increase the profitability for the selling division? The answer, of course, is no. Thus, why would
a manager, who is rewarded based on profitability, sell goods at variable cost? Obviously, the manager would
prefer not to sell at variable cost and would rather sell the goods at some amount above variable cost and thus
contribute to the segment's profitability. What should the transfer price be? There are various options for
choosing a transfer price.

   CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

   Transfer Pricing with Overseas Segments

   An inherent assumption in transfer pricing is that the divisions of a company are located in the same
   country. While implementing a transfer pricing framework can be complex for a business located entirely
   in the United States, transfer pricing becomes even more complex when any of the divisions are located
   outside of the United States.

   Companies with overseas transactions involving transfer pricing must pay particular attention to ensure
   compliance with the tax, foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations, and other regulations in the
   countries in which they operate.

   This can be expensive and difficult for companies to manage. While many firms use their own employees
   to manage the process, the Big Four accounting firms, for example, offer expertise in transfer pricing
   setup and regulatory compliance. This short video from Deloitte on transfer pricing
   (https://openstax.org/l/50TranferPrice) provides more information about this valuable service that
   accountants provide.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization  485

Available Transfer Pricing Approaches

There are three primary transfer pricing approaches: market-based prices, cost-based prices, or negotiated
prices.

Market Price Approach

With the market price approach, the transfer price paid by the purchaser is the price the seller would use for
an outside customer. Market-based prices are consistent with the responsibility accounting concepts of profit
and investment centers, as managers of these units are evaluated based on purchasing and selling goods and
services at market prices. Market-based transfer pricing is very common in a situation in which the seller is
operating at full capacity.

The benefit of using a market price approach is that the company will need to stay familiar with market prices.
This will likely occur naturally because the company will also have outside sales. A potential disadvantage of
this approach is that conflicts might arise when there are discrepancies between the current market price and
the market price the company sets for transfer prices. Firms should decide at what point and how frequently
to update the transfer prices used in a market approach.

For example, assume a company adopts a market approach for transfer prices. As time goes by, the market
price will likely change--it will either increase or decrease. When this occurs, the firm must decide if and when
to update transfer prices. If current market prices are higher than the market price the company uses, the
selling division will be happy because the price earned for intersegment (transfer) sales will increase while
inputs (costs) to provide the goods or services remain the same. An increase in the transfer price will, in turn,
increase the profit margins of the selling division. The opposite is true for the purchasing division. If the
market transfer price increases to match the current market price, the costs (cost of goods sold, in particular)
will increase. Without a corresponding increase in the prices charged to its customers or an offset through
cost reductions, the profit margins of the purchasing division will decrease. This situation could cause conflict
between divisions within same company, an unenviable situation for management as one manager is pleased
with the transfer price situation and the other is not. Both managers desire to improve the profits of their
respective divisions, but in this situation, the purchasing division may feel they are giving up profits that are
then being realized by the selling division due the increase in the market price of the goods and the use of a
market-based transfer price.

Cost Approach

When the transfer price uses a cost approach, the price may be based on either total variable cost, full cost, or
a cost-plus scenario. In the variable cost scenario, as mentioned previously, the transfer of the goods would
take place at the total of all variable costs incurred to produce the product. In a full-cost scenario, the goods
would be transferred at the variable cost plus the fixed cost per unit associated with making that product. With
a cost-plus transfer price, the goods would be transferred at either the variable cost or the full-cost plus a
predetermined markup percentage. For example, assume the variable cost to produce a product is $10 and
the full cost is $12. If the company uses a cost-plus methodology to calculate the transfer price with a 30%
mark-up, the transfer price would be $13 ($10 × 130%) based on just the variable cost or $15.60 ($12 × 130%)
based on the full cost. When using the full cost as a basis for applying markup, it is important to understand
that the cost structure may include costs that are irrelevant to establishing a transfer price (for example, costs
unrelated to producing the actual product to be transferred, such as the fixed cost of the plant supervisor's
salary, which will exist whether the product is transferred internally or externally), which may unnecessarily
486                                                                               Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization

influence decisions.

The benefit of using a cost approach is that the company will invest effort into determining the actual costs
involved in making a product or providing another service. The selling division should be able to justify to the
purchasing division the cost that will be charged, which likely includes a profit margin, based on what the
division would earn on a sale to an outside customer. At the same time, a deeper understanding of what drives
the costs within a division provides an opportunity to identify activities that add unnecessary costs. Companies
can, in turn, work to increase efficiency and eliminate unnecessary activity and bring down the cost. In
essence, the selling division has to justify the costs it is charging the purchasing division.

Negotiated Price Approach

Somewhere in between a transfer price based on cost and one based on market is a negotiated price
approach in which the company allows the buying segment and the selling segment to negotiate the transfer
price. This is common in situations in which there is no external market. When an external price exists and is
used as a starting point for establishing the transfer price, the organization must be aware of differences in
specific costs between the source of the external price and its own organization. For example, a price from an
external source may include a higher profit margin than the profit margin targeted by a company pursuing a
cost leadership strategy. In this case, the external price should be reduced to account for such differences.

However, one disadvantage of using a negotiated price system is the possibility of creating a situation in which
competition exists between a department and an outside vendor (as occurs when it is cheaper for a
department to purchase from an outside vendor rather than another department in the organization) or,
worse yet, between departments of the same organization. It is paramount that, when selecting a transfer
pricing methodology, the goals of the particular departments involved align with the overall strategic goals of
the organization. A transfer pricing structure is not intended to facilitate competition between departments
within the same company. Rather, a transfer pricing system should be viewed as a tool to help the company
remain competitive in the marketplace and improve a company's overall profit margin.

Other Transfer Pricing Issues

The three approaches to transfer pricing assume that the selling department has excess capacity to produce
additional products to sell internally. What happens if the selling department does not have excess
capacity--in other words, if the selling department can sell all that it produces to external customers? If an
internal department wants to purchase goods from the selling department, what would be an appropriate
selling price? In this case, the transfer price must take into consideration the opportunity cost of the
contribution margin that would be lost from having to forego external sales in order to meet internal sales.

Suppose in the previous example that the blending department is at full capacity but the bottling department
wants to purchase some of its soft drink blends internally. Assume the variable cost to produce one unit of soft
drink is $10, the fixed cost per unit is $2, and the market price for selling one unit is $18. What would be an
appropriate transfer price in this situation? Since the blending department does not have the capacity to meet
external sales plus internal sales, in order to accept the internal sales order, the blending department would
have to lose sales to external customers. The contribution margin per unit is $8 ($18 - $10). Thus, $8 per unit
would be given up for each external unit that is sold internally.

Looking only at costs, the blending department would be indifferent between an external sale of $18 and an
internal sale of $18 ($10 variable cost + $8 contribution margin). Obviously, there are other issues that need to

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization  487

be considered in these situations, such as the effect on external customers if demand cannot be met. Overall,
if there is no excess capacity, the transfer price should take into consideration the opportunity cost lost from
taking internal sales over external sales.

In addition to the possibility of losing opportunity costs, there are additional transfer pricing issues. Recall that
decentralized organizations delegate decision-making authority throughout the organization. A well-designed
transfer pricing policy can contribute not only to the segment manager's profits but to overall corporate
profits in situations where the transfer price is lower than the external price. However, when a transfer pricing
system is used to facilitate transactions between departments, an ill-designed policy is likely to lead to
disputes between departments. It is possible the departments view each other as competition rather than
strategic partners. When this occurs, it is important for upper-level management to establish a process that
allows managers to resolve disagreements in a way that aligns with organizational, rather than departmental,
goals.

Transfer pricing systems become even more complicated when departments are located in different countries.
The transfer price in an international setting must also account for differences in currencies and fluctuating
exchange rate as well as differences in regulations such as tariffs and duties, taxes, and other regulations.

Transfer Pricing Example

Regal Paper has two divisions. The Paper Division produces copy paper, wrapping paper, and paper used on
the outside of cardboard displays placed in grocery, office, and department stores. The Box Division produces
cardboard boxes sold at Christmas, cardboard boxes purchased by manufacturers for packaging their goods,
and cardboard displays for stores, particularly seasonal displays. Both divisions are profit centers, and each
manager is evaluated and rewarded based on his division's profitability. The Box Division has approached the
Paper Division to buy paper needed to cover cardboard displays that have been ordered by several major
snack food manufacturers for the upcoming Superbowl game. The Box Division has been buying the display
coverings from an external seller for $12.50 per unit. Currently, the Paper Division has excess capacity and can
fill the order for the 500,000 display coverings that the Box Division is requesting.

The cost to the Paper Division to produce one display covering is as follows:

What would be the transfer price per unit under each of the following scenarios?

 1. Market-based transfer price. This transfer price is the same as the selling price to external customers,
      which is $12.

 2. Cost-based transfer price. This transfer price is the same as the variable costs per unit, which is $8.
 3. Full-cost-based transfer price. This transfer price is the same as the variable costs plus the fixed cost per

      unit, which is $9.
 4. Cost plus assuming 20% mark-up. This marks up the cost-based transfer price by 20%, which is $8 × 120%,

      or $9.60.
 5. Full-cost plus assuming 20% mark-up. This marks up the full-cost-based transfer price by 20%, which is $9

      × 120%, or $10.80.
 6. Range of negotiated transfer price. The negotiated transfer price should be between the lowest and

      highest possible prices: $8-12
488                                                                               Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization

7. What if Paper had no excess capacity? If the Paper Division had no excess capacity, the transfer price
     would be the cost plus the contribution margin, which is $8 + $4, or $12.

8. Which transfer price is best? If there is excess capacity, then typically a negotiated transfer price is best,
     as it allows the managers who are evaluated on that decision to have input into the decision and does not
     take away their autonomy. Table 9.1 shows the per-unit effect on income of each of the transfer pricing
     options on each division. Remember, the effects provided here cannot necessarily be generalized, as
     there are two critical factors: whether or not the selling department is at capacity and the price at which
     the purchasing department could buy the goods externally, which in this case is $0.50 more per unit than
     the market price of the paper being sold by the Paper Division.

           Per-Unit Effect on Division Income of Various Transfer Pricing Methodologies

     Transfer Pricing                   Paper Division                            Box Division
           Method

Market                 $4 per unit increase in income                             $0.50 per unit increase in income
                       ($12 SP - $8 VC)                                           ($12.50 - $12 SP)

Cost                   $0 per unit increase in income                             $4.50 per unit increase in income
                       ($8 SP - $8 VC)                                            ($12.50 - $8)

Full-cost              $1 per unit increase in income                             $3.50 per unit increase in income
                       ($9 SP - $8 VC)                                            ($12.50 - $9)

Cost-Plus (20%)        $1.60 per unit increase in income                          $2.90 per unit increase in income
                       ($9.60 SP - $8 VC)                                         ($12.50 - $9.60)

Full-cost Plus (20%)   $2.80 per unit increase in income                          $1.70 per unit increase in income
                       ($10.80 SP - $8VC)                                         ($12.50 - $10.80)

Negotiated ($0 - $12)  Increase to income between $0 and $4                       Increase to income between $0.50
                       per unit                                                   and $4.50

No Excess Capacity     $4 per unit increase in income                             $0.50 per unit increase in income
                       ($12 SP - $8 VC)                                           ($12.50 - $12 SP)

SP = selling price; VC = variable cost

Table 9.1

As you can see, the transfer price can significantly affect the profitability of the division. It is easy to see which
transfer prices most benefit the seller and which most benefit the buyer. Thus, as previously mentioned, a
negotiated transfer price is often the best resolution to determining a transfer price.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization                                                    489

THINK IT THROUGH

Comparing Transfer Pricing and Outsourcing

Assume you are the President of a manufacturing firm that has a division that transfers products to
other divisions within the company. The other divisions have recently complained that the transfer price
charged to the departments has increased significantly over the past several quarters. They are
frustrated because performance evaluations and bonuses are linked to the profitability of their
respective departments.

During a recent management meeting, a cost accountant suggests the company can solve this issue by
transferring production to another supplier that has a lower cost of production due to lower labor costs.
In addition to solving the conflict between departments, the company's overall profitability will increase
because of the substantial cost savings.

Evaluate this scenario and explain how you would respond as the company's President. Consider the
perspectives of various stakeholders in this situation.
490                                                                               Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization

     Key Terms

allocated costs costs that are generated by non-revenue generating portions of the business, such as
     corporate headquarters, that are assigned based on some formula to the revenue generating portions of
     the business

centralization business structure in which one individual makes the important decisions and provides the
     primary strategic direction for the company

controllable costs those that a company or manager can influence
cost approach transfer pricing structure in which the transfer price may be based on total variable cost, full

     cost, or a cost-plus scenario, calculated by adding a markup to either variable cost or full cost
cost center organizational segment in which a manager is held responsible only for costs
decentralization business structure in which the decision-making is made at various levels of the

     organization
discretionary cost center organizational segment in which a manager is held responsible only for

     controllable costs when there is not a well-defined relationship between the center's costs and its services
     or products
goal congruence integration of multiple goals, either within an organization or across multiple components
     or entities; congruence is achieved by aligning goals to achieve an anticipated mission
investment center organizational segment in which a manager is accountable for profits (revenues minus
     expenses) and the invested capital used by the segment
lower-level management level of management that provides basic supervision and oversight for the
     operations of the organization
management control system structure within an organization that allows managers to establish,
     implement, and monitor progress toward the strategic goals of the organization
market price approach transfer pricing structure in which the transfer price is based on the price the seller
     would use for an outside customer
mid-level management level of management that receives direction from upper management and
     supervises and provides direction to lower-level management
negotiated price approach transfer pricing structure in which the transfer price is based on negotiations
     between the buying segment and the selling segment
organizational chart graphical representations illustrating the authority for decision-making and oversight
     throughout an organization
profit center organizational segment in which a manager is responsible for and evaluted on both revenues
     and costs
residual income (RI) amount of income a given division (or project) is expected to earn in excess of a firm's
     minimum return goal
responsibility accounting method of encouraging goal congruence by setting and communicating the
     financial performance measures by which managers will be evaluated
responsibility centers segments in which supervisors or managers have responsibility for the performance
     of the center and the authority to make decisions that affect the center
return on investment (ROI) measure of the percentage of income generated by profits that were invested
     in capital assets
revenue center part of an organization in which management is evaluated based on the ability to generate
     revenues; the manager's primary control is only revenues
segment portion of the business that management believes has sufficient similarities in product lines,

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization  491

     geographic locations, or customers to warrant reporting that portion of the company as a distinct part of
     the entire company
transfer pricing pricing structure used when one segment of a business "sells" goods to another segment
     of the same business
uncontrollable costs those that an organization or manager has little or no ability to influence
upper management level of management that consists of the board of directors and chief executives
     charged with providing strategic guidance for the organization

     Summary

9.1 Differentiate between Centralized and Decentralized Management
  · Management control systems allow managers to develop a reporting structure to help the organization
      meet its strategic goals.
  · In centralized organizations, primary decisions are made by the person or persons at the top of the
      organization.
  · Decentralized organizations delegate decision-making authority throughout the organization.
  · Daily decision-making involves frequent and immediate decisions.
  · Strategic decision-making involves infrequent and long-term decisions.

9.2 Describe How Decision-Making Differs between Centralized and Decentralized Environments
  · Segments are uniquely identifiable components of the business that facilitate the effective and efficient
      operation of the business.
  · Organizational charts are used to graphically represent the authority structure of an organization.
  · The CEO of a centralized organization will establish the strategy and make decisions that will be
      implemented throughout the organization.
  · The CEO of a decentralized organization will establish strategic goals and empower managers to achieve
      the goals.

9.3 Describe the Types of Responsibility Centers
  · A responsibility accounting structure helps management evaluate the financial performance of the
      segments in the organization.
  · Responsibility centers are segments within a responsibility accounting structure.
  · Five types of responsibility centers include cost centers, discretionary cost centers, revenue centers, profit
      centers, and investment centers.
  · Cost centers are responsibility centers that focus only on expenses.
  · Discretionary cost centers are responsibility centers that focus only on controllable expenses.
  · Revenue centers are responsibility centers that focus on revenues.
  · Profit centers are responsibility centers that focus on revenues and expenses.
  · Investment centers are responsibility centers that consider the investments made by the responsibility
      center.
  · Return on investment is a particular type of investment center structure that calculates a responsibility
      center's profit percentage relative to the center's investment.
  · Residual income is a particular type of investment center structure that evaluates investments using a
      common cost of capital rate amongst all responsibility centers.

9.4 Describe the Effects of Various Decisions on Performance Evaluation of Responsibility Centers
  · Uncontrollable costs are costs that management or an organization has little or no ability to influence.
492  Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization

· Controllable costs are costs that managers or an organization can influence.
· Managers in a responsibility accounting structure should only be evaluated based on controllable costs.
· Businesses with segments that provide goods to other segments within the business often use a transfer

   pricing structure to record the transaction.
· The general transfer pricing model considers the opportunity costs involved in selling to internal rather

   than external customers. This method is difficult to implement and businesses often choose other
   methods.
· The market price model uses market prices that would be used for external customers as the basis for
   internal transfers.
· The cost approach uses the company's cost to make the product as the basis for establishing the transfer
   price.
· The negotiated model allows the selling and buying segments within the business to determine the
   transfer price.
· Transfer price arrangements are more difficult in international businesses because of complexities related
   to taxes, duties, and currency fluctuations.

     Multiple Choice

1. 9.1 Which of the following is not a common goal of an organization?
    A. operational efficiency
    B. being acquired by another business
    C. achieving strategic goals
    D. measuring financial performance

2. 9.1 Which of the following does not describe a management control system?
    A. establishes a company's strategic goals
    B. implements a company's strategic goals
    C. monitors a company's strategic goals
    D. a system that only measures profitability

3. 9.1 In centralized organizations, primary decisions are made by ________.
    A. an individual at the top of the organization
    B. various managers throughout the organization
    C. outside consultants
    D. low-level management

4. 9.1 A key advantage of a decentralized organization is ________.
    A. increased administrative costs
    B. quicker decisions and response time
    C. the ease of aligning segment and company goals
    D. duplication of efforts

5. 9.1 Strategic decisions occur ________.
    A. frequently and involve immediate decisions
    B. frequently and involve long-term decisions
    C. infrequently and involve long-term decisions
    D. infrequently and involve immediate decisions

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization                    493

6. 9.2 Segments are uniquely identifiable components of the business and can be categorized by all of the
following except ________.

    A. products produced
    B. services provided
    C. geographical location
    D. number of employees

7. 9.2 Organizational charts ________.
    A. list the salaries of all employees
    B. outline the strategic goals of the organization
    C. show the structure of an organization
    D. help management measure financial performance

8. 9.2 In a centralized organization, where are goals established?
    A. at the lower level of the organization and promoted upward
    B. outside the organization based on best practices in the industry
    C. by each segment of the organization
    D. at the highest level of the organization and promoted downward

9. 9.2 Managers in decentralized organizations make decisions relating to all of the following except ________.

A. the company's stock price
B. equipment purchases
C. personnel
D. prices to charge customers

10.     9.3 Which of the following is not a type of responsibility center?
    A.  concentrated cost center
    B.  investment center
    C.  profit center
    D.  cost center

11. 9.3 A system that establishes financial accountability for operating segments within an organization is
called ________.

    A. a financial statement
    B. an internal control system
    C. responsibility accounting
    D. centralization

12. 9.3 A responsibility center in which managers are held accountable for both revenues and expenses is
called a ________.

    A. discretionary cost center
    B. revenue center
    C. cost center
    D. profit center
494                                                                               Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization

13. 9.3 A responsibility center structure that considers investments made by the operating segments by
using a common cost of capital percentage is called ________.

    A. return on investment
    B. residual income
    C. a profit center
    D. a discretionary cost center

14. 9.3 An important goal of a responsibility accounting framework is to help ensure which of the
following?

    A. decision-making is made by the top executives.
    B. investments made by each segment are minimized.
    C. identification of operating segments that should be closed.
    D. segment and company financial goals are congruent.

15.     9.4 Costs that a company or manager can influence are called ________.
    A.  discretionary costs
    B.  fixed costs
    C.  variable costs
    D.  controllable costs

16.     9.4 An example of an uncontrollable cost would include all of the following except ________.
    A.  real estate taxes charged by the county in which the business operates
    B.  per-gallon cost of fuel for the company's delivery trucks
    C.  hourly rate of pay for the company's purchasing manager
    D.  federal income tax rate paid by the company

17.     9.4 Internal costs that are charged to the segments of a business are called ________.
    A.  controllable costs
    B.  variable costs
    C.  fixed costs
    D.  allocated costs

18. 9.4 A transfer pricing arrangement that uses the price that would be charged to an external customer is
a ________.

    A. market-based approach
    B. negotiated approach
    C. cost approach
    D. decentralized approach

19. 9.4 A transfer pricing structure that considers the opportunity costs of selling to internal rather than
external customers uses ________.

    A. the cost approach
    B. the general transfer pricing approach
    C. the market-based approach
    D. the opportunity cost approach

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization  495

     Questions

1. 9.1 What is a management control system? What are its components and how does the system help the
business?

2. 9.1 Identify and describe the levels of management, including the various types of decisions managers at
each level make.

3. 9.1 Discuss the difference between centralized and decentralized organizations. Does the size of the
organization influence whether the organization has a centralized or decentralized structure? Explain.

4. 9.1 Identify a company where you recently shopped. Assume the company operates with a decentralized
structure. Describe how customers might benefit from the decentralized structure.

5. 9.1 Discuss the difference between daily and strategic decisions. Think of a business and provide an
example of a daily and strategic decision.

6. 9.1 Access PepsiCo's 2017 annual report (https://openstax.org/l/50Pepsi2017) . Starting at the top of the
document, use the find (Ctrl + F) or search feature in the browser to search the annual report for the word
"segments" to determine how many operating segments PepsiCo has. What are the segments? How are the
segments categorized?

7. 9.1 Another search of PepsiCo's 2017 annual report (https://openstax.org/l/50 Pepsi2017) reveals the
company maintains a centralized management perspective on aspects of these items:

      · Commodities (items such as sugar and high fructose corn syrup that go into many of the beverages)
      · Research and development
      · Insurance and benefit program
      · Foreign currency transactions
      · Debt, investments, and other financing activities

Explain why these activities would be centralized functions within PepsiCo as opposed to decentralized like
many other activities.

8. 9.2 Define segments and describe how identifying segments within a business might help manage the
business.

9. 9.2 Choose a company and describe how a specific issue, policy, or procedure (for example, granting
merchandise returns, establishing sales prices) might look if the business is structured as a centralized
business.

10. 9.2 Choose a company and explain how a specific issue, policy, or procedure (for example, granting
merchandise returns, establishing sales prices) might look if the business is structured as a decentralized
business.

11. 9.2 Assume you are the manager of a local Starbucks. What factors do you feel would be relevant to
hiring workers (including pay), assuming Starbucks is a decentralized organization?

12. 9.2 Assume you are the manager of a local Starbucks. What factors do you feel would be relevant to
hiring workers (including pay), assuming Starbucks is a centralized organization?
496                                                                               Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization

13. 9.2 Use Netflix's 2017 annual report (https://openstax.org/l/50Netflix2017) to answer the following
questions. How many segments does Netflix have? What are the segments? The annual report also shows
selected nonfinancial and financial information for each segment. Prepare a brief presentation listing the
"Paid memberships at end of period," "Revenues," and "Contribution profit" (also called operating profit) for
the three most recent years (2017, 2016, and 2015). In the presentation, include any observations you notice
about the trends of each segment.

14. 9.2 Reference the Kellogg Company's 2017 annual report (https://openstax.org/l/50Kellogg2017) to
answer the following question. In "Note 18: Reportable Segments," you will find selected financial information
for segments within Kellogg Company. Prepare a brief presentation listing each segment, along with the "Net
Sales," "Operating Profit," and "Total Assets." For Total Assets, you should ignore Corporate and Elimination
entries, and you will need to combine the U.S. divisions into a North American total. Report this information for
the three most recent years (2017, 2016, and 2015). In the presentation, include any observations you notice
about the trends of each segment. You may want to use Microsoft Excel or another spreadsheet application
for the numerical data. This information will be used in a subsequent question.

15. 9.2 Lavell started out mowing lawns in the neighborhood when he was 13 years old. He did such good
work that, without advertising, his business grew steadily each year. After college, Lavell decided to continue
the business as a full-time career. One of his concerns, however, is the number of hours he is putting in. Once
school lets out, he finds himself working long hours nearly every day of the week. Although he has added
workers, his business now handles mowing, trimming, and landscaping for residential, corporate, and
nonprofit clients. He is considering adding managers but is not quite sure how to structure the organization.
Lavell wants to focus on building the business rather than doing the daily work, so he knows a decentralized
structure will be best. He has asked you to develop a potential organizational chart to help him envision the
best way to organize the business. Describe the advantages to this approach as well as any concerns he
should have.

16. 9.3 Describe the concept of responsibility accounting.

17. 9.3 Describe the concept of a cost center and, using a specific organization, give an example of how this
might be used to achieve the strategic goals of the organization.

18. 9.3 Describe the concept of a profit center and, using a specific organization, give an example of how
this might be used to achieve the strategic goals of the organization.

19. 9.3 Explain the benefits of a return on investment structure within an investment center framework. It
may help to think of an example using an existing company.

20. 9.3 Explain the benefits of a residual income structure within an investment center framework. It may
help to think of an example using an existing company.

21. 9.4 Discuss the concept of controllable and uncontrollable costs and how they affect the evaluation of
the responsibility center's financial performance.

22. 9.4 Discuss the concept of transfer pricing.

23. 9.4 Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of a market-based transfer pricing approach.

24. 9.4 Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of a cost-based transfer pricing approach.

25. 9.4 Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of a negotiated transfer pricing approach.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization                                                   497

     Exercise Set A

EA1. 9.3 Assume you have been hired by Hilton Hotels and Resorts. As part of your new role in the
accounting department, you have been tasked to set up a responsibility accounting structure for the company.
As your first task, your supervisor has asked you to give an example of a cost center, profit center, and an
investment center within the Hilton organization. Your supervisor is a little unsure of the difference between a
profit center and investment center and would like you to explain the difference.

EA2. 9.3 Consider the national nonprofit organization the American Red Cross. Assume you are the regional
director of the organization, and you just received the quarterly financial reports. Even though the
organization is a nonprofit, assume it is set up as a profit center because it is helpful for the financial reports to
show both donations and expenses by each region/location. One particular report shows there is one location
in your region that is extremely over budget on nearly every expense item. From a management perspective,
can you think of a reason(s) when going over budget might actually be a good thing? As the regional
manager, how might you respond to the overages to help the particular location in the future?

EA3. 9.3 The following information is from Bluff Run Golf Courses. The company runs three courses and the
July income statement for each course is shown.

    A. Find the missing value for outings revenue, wages, and operating income.
    B. Comment on the financial performance of each course.
    C. Identify a limitation of analyzing the information provided.

You may want to consider using Microsoft Excel or another spreadsheet application for the numerical data.
This information will be used in a subsequent question.
498  Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization

EA4. 9.3 The following information is from Dave's Sporting Goods. Dave's is a Midwest sporting goods
store with three regional stores. The August income statement for all stores is shown.

    A. Comment on the operating income results for each store.
    B. Now assume the costs allocated from corporate is an uncontrollable cost for each store. How does this

          change your assessment of each store?

EA5. 9.4 Assume you are the department B manager for Marley's Manufacturing. Marley's operates under
a cost-based transfer structure. Assume you receive the majority of your raw materials from department A,
which sells only to department B (they have no outside sales). After calculating the operating income in dollars
and operating income in percentage, analyze the following financial information to determine costs that may
need further investigation. (Hint: It may be helpful to perform a vertical analysis.)

EA6. 9.4 As manager of department B in Marley's Manufacturing, based on the costs you identified in the
previous exercise for further research, how does this impact the financial performance of your department,
and what might be some questions you want to ask or solutions you might propose to Marley's management?
EA7. 9.4 Based on your research of the market in the previous exercises, you have determined the market
price for the items your department purchase is 15% below what you are being charged by department A of
Marley's Manufacturing. How would you view this as a manager? What steps could you take to solve this
discrepancy? What alternatives would you consider, assuming you had control over purchasing decisions?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization                                                   499

EA8. 9.4 Using the information in the previous exercises about Marley's Manufacturing, determine the
operating income for department B, assuming department A "sold" department B 1,000 units during the
month and department A reduces the selling price to the market price.

  B Exercise Set B

EB1. 9.3 Assume you have been hired by Cabela's Sporting Goods. As part of your new role in the
accounting department, you have been tasked to set up a responsibility accounting structure for the company.
As your first task, your supervisor has asked you to give an example of a cost center, profit center, and an
investment center within the Cabela's organization. Your supervisor is a little unsure of the difference between
a profit center and investment center and would like you to explain the difference.

EB2. 9.3 Assume you are the regional manager for a hotel chain. You receive the quarterly financial reports
and notice one particular hotel had drastically lower revenue and a corresponding high occupancy rate. Upon
further investigation, you discover the manager for the hotel provided lodging for a neighboring town that
was hit by a tornado. As the manager, how do you respond to this?

EB3. 9.3 The following information is from Dessert Dynasty. The company runs three stores and the
December Income Statement for all stores is shown.

    A. Find the missing values for retail revenue, ingredients, and operating income.
    B. Comment on the financial performance of each store.
    C. Identify a limitation of analyzing the information provided.

You may want to consider using Microsoft Excel or another spreadsheet application for the numerical data.
This information will be used in a subsequent question.
500  Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization

EB4. 9.3 The following information is from Good Read Books. Good Read is a regional book store with three
regional stores. The May income statement for all stores is shown.

    A. Comment on the operating income results for each store.
    B. Now assume the costs allocated from corporate is an uncontrollable cost for each store. How does this

          change your assessment of each store?

EB5. 9.4 Assume you are the warehouse manager for Vinnie's Vinyls, a multi-location business specializing
in vinyl records. Vinnies's operates under a cost-based transfer structure and the warehouse supplies all stores
with the records. The stores can purchase records only from the warehouse, and the warehouse can only sell
to Vinnie's stores. The manager of the West store has some concerns relating to the store's financial
performance and has asked for your help analyzing transfer costs. After calculating the operating income in
dollars and the operating income percent, analyze the following financial information to determine costs that
may need further investigation. (Hint: it may be helpful to perform a vertical analysis.)

EB6. 9.4 As manager of the warehouse for Vinnie's Vinyls, based on this analysis and the items you
identified for further research, what is your advice to the manager of the West store? What might be some
questions you want to ask or solutions you might propose to Vinnie's management?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization                     501

EB7. 9.4 Discuss how, as warehouse manager for Vinnie's Vinyls, you view the different rate of allocated
costs the warehouse is being charged compared to the West store. Describe the implications of this. What
steps could you take to solve this discrepancy? What alternatives would you consider, assuming management
is willing to consider making changes in the rate?

EB8. 9.4 Determine the operating income for Vinnie's Vinyls' West store, assuming the warehouse
allocation is reduced to 10% of sales for the warehouse and the difference will be charged to the West store.
Management has determined that the warehouse takes fewer corporate resources and the allocation to the
West store was lower than it should have been.

     Problem Set A

PA1. 9.3 Use the following information to answer the questions that follow.

A. Calculate the operating income percentage for each of the courses. Comment on how your analysis
      has changed for each course.

B. Perform a vertical analysis for each course. Based on your analysis, what accounts would you want to
      investigate further? How might management utilize this information?

C. Which method of analysis (using a dollar value or percentage) is most relevant and/or useful? Explain.
502  Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization

PA2. 9.3 Use Netflix's 2017 annual report (https://openstax.org/l/50Netflix2017) to answer the following
questions.

    A. Using the revenue and contribution profit information, calculate the contribution profit (loss)
          percentage for each of the divisions. Comment on how your analysis has changed compared to your
          analysis of the dollar amounts for each division.

    B. Since companies typically do not publicly provide more than macro levels of asset values, let's assume
          the following level of assets (investment):

          Calculate the return on investment (ROI) for each division. Comment on the results.
    C. Assume that Netflix uses a cost of capital of 7%. Calculate the residual income (RI) for each of the

          divisions. Comment on the results.

PA3. 9.3 The income statement comparison for Forklift Material Handling shows the income statement for
the current and prior year.

    A. Determine the operating income (loss) (dollars) for each year.
    B. Determine the operating income (percentage) for each year.
    C. The company made a strategic decision to invest in additional assets in the current year. These

          amounts are provided. Using the total assets amounts as the investment base, calculate the return on
          investment. Was the decision to invest additional assets in the company successful? Explain.
    D. Assuming an 8% cost of capital, calculate the residual income for each year. Explain how this compares
          to your findings in part C.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization                                              503

PA4. 9.3 Assume you are the leather department manager at the Famous Football Factory. The leather
department is a cost center and you are reviewing the scrap costs for the previous year, shown here:

A. Using Microsoft Excel or another spreadsheet application, create a line chart with markers showing the
      leather scrap expense. Describe your observations.

B. Knowing that leather is susceptible to indoor temperature, you decide to talk with the maintenance
      manager and obtain the following information:

Using Microsoft Excel or another spreadsheet application, create individual line charts with markers showing
the indoor temperature, spare parts inventory, and breakdowns. Describe your observations and actions you
might consider.
504                                                                               Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization

PA5. 9.4 Financial information for BDS Enterprises for the year-ended December 31, 20xx, was gathered
from an accounting intern, who has asked for your guidance on how to prepare an income statement format
that will be distributed to management. Subtotals and totals are included in the information, but you will need
to calculate the values.

    A. In the correct format, prepare the income statement using the following information:
    B. Calculate the profit margin, return on investment, and residual income. Assume an investment base of

          $100,000 and 6% cost of capital.
    C. Prepare a short response to accompany the income statement that explains why uncontrollable costs

          are included in the income statement.

PA6. 9.4 Using the information from BDS Enterprises, prepare the income statement to include all costs,
but separate out uncontrollable costs. Insert subtotals where appropriate (include one for operating income)
before the uncontrollable costs. Income tax expense should be based on all expenses (that is, it will be the
same amount as in question 1). Calculate net income, profit margin, ROI, and RI, excluding uncontrollable
expenses. Prepare a short response to accompany the income statement that explains why uncontrollable
costs are separated in the income statement.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization  505

PA7. 9.4 Management of Great Springs Bottled Water Company has asked you, the controller, to develop a
transfer pricing system for the company. The Transportation Department of the company sells all of its
product to the Bottling Department of the company. Thus the Transportation Department's sales become the
Bottling Department's cost of goods sold. In order to determine an optimal transfer pricing system,
management would like you to demonstrate what an income statement would look like under a cost, market,
and negotiated transfer pricing structure. These various transfer prices are listed as follows. Prepare an
income statement for each of the transfer prices by filling in the missing numbers in the provided income
statement based on each transfer price (thus four different income statements) and calculate the operating
income/loss percentage. Prepare a brief summary of the results.

PA8. 9.4 The following revenue data were taken from the December 31, 2017, Coca-Cola annual report
(10-K):

For each segment and each year, calculate intersegment sales (another name for transfer sales) as a
percentage of total sales. Using Microsoft Excel or another spreadsheet application, create a clustered column
graph to show the 2016 and 2017 percentages for each division. Comment on your observations of this data.
How might a division sales manager use this data?
506  Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization

  B Problem Set B

PB1. 9.3 Use the following information to answer the questions that follow.

    A. Calculate the operating income percentage for each of the stores. Comment on how your analysis has
          changed for each store.

    B. Perform a vertical analysis for each store. Based on your analysis, what accounts would you want to
          investigate further? How might management utilize this information?

    C. Which method of analysis (using a dollar value or percentage) is most relevant and/or useful? Explain.
PB2. 9.3 Use Kellogg's 2017 annual report (https://openstax.org/l/50Kellogg2017) to answer the following
questions.

    A. Using the information for Kellogg, calculate the operating profit percentage for each of the divisions.
          Comment on how your analysis has changed compared to your analysis of the dollar amounts for each
          division.

    B. Using total assets as the investment, calculate the ROI for each division. In the total assets information
          you compile, you should ignore corporate and elimination entries amounts and you will also need to
          combine the U.S. divisions into a North American total. Comment on the results.

    C. Assume that Kellogg uses a cost of capital of 10%. Calculate the RI for each of the divisions (you will
          need to condense the U.S. divisions into a North American total). Comment on the results.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization                                           507

PB3. 9.3 The income statement comparison for Rush Delivery Company shows the income statement for
the current and prior year.

A. Determine the operating income (loss) (dollars) for each year.
B. Determine the operating income (percentage) for each year.
C. The company made a strategic decision to invest in additional assets in the current year. These

      amounts are provided. Using the total assets amounts as the investment base, calculate the ROI. Was
      the decision to invest additional assets in the company successful? Explain.
D. Assuming an 8% cost of capital, calculate the RI for each year. Explain how this compares to your
      findings in part C.
508                                                                               Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization

PB4. 9.3 Assume you are the manager for the semi-trucks division at the Speedy Delivery Company. The
semi-truck division is a cost center and you are reviewing the driver overtime costs for the previous year,
shown here:

    A. Microsoft Excel or another spreadsheet application, create a line chart with markers showing the driver
          overtime expense. Describe your observations.

    B. Knowing that safety is important in your industry and weather plays a significant role in the safety of
          drivers, you decide to talk with the safety manager and obtained the following information:

Using Microsoft Excel or another spreadsheet application, create individual line charts with markers showing
the average snowfall and non-company highway accidents. Describe your observations and actions you might
consider.
PB5. 9.4 Financial information for Lighthizer Trading Company for the fiscal year-ended September 30,
20xx, was collected. As part of a management training session, you have been asked to prepare an income
statement format that will be used to distribute to management. Subtotals and totals are included in the
information, but you will need to calculate the values.

    A. In the correct format, prepare the income statement using this information:
    B. Calculate the profit margin, return on investment, and residual income. Assume an investment base of

          $42,000 and 8% cost of capital.
    C. Prepare a short response to accompany the income statement that explains why uncontrollable costs

          are included in the income statement.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization  509

PB6. 9.4 Using the information for Lighthizer Trading Company, prepare the income statement to include
all costs, but separate out uncontrollable costs. Insert subtotals where appropriate (include one for operating
income) before the uncontrollable costs. Income tax expense should be based on all expenses (that is, it will
be the same amount as in the previous exercise). Calculate net income, profit margin, ROI, and RI excluding
uncontrollable expenses. Prepare a short response to accompany the income statement that explains why
uncontrollable costs are separated in the income statement.

PB7. 9.4 Management of Green Peak Tea Company has asked you, the controller, to develop a transfer
pricing system for the company. The Brewing Department of the company sells all of its product to the
Bottling Department of the company. Thus the Brewing Department's sales become the Bottling
Department's cost of goods sold. In order to determine an optimal transfer pricing system, management
would like you to demonstrate what an income statement would look like under a cost, market, and
negotiated transfer pricing structure. These various transfer prices are listed as follows. Prepare an income
statement for each of the transfer prices by filling in the missing numbers in the provided income statement
based on each transfer price (thus four different income statements) and calculate the operating income/loss
percentage. Prepare a brief summary of the results.
510                                                                               Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization

PB8. 9.4 The following revenue data were taken from the December 31, 2017, General Electric annual report
(10-K):

For each segment and each year, calculate intersegment sales (another name for transfer sales) as a
percentage of total sales. Using Microsoft Excel or another spreadsheet application, create a clustered column
graph to show the 2016 and 2017 percentages for each division. Comment on your observations of this data.
How might a division sales manager use this data?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization                                                          511

     Thought Provokers

TP1. 9.1 You have just been elected president of a brand-new service club on campus. The club is part of a
national organization, but the organization charter gives the local organization a fair amount of flexibility in
setting up the management of the club. As president, you can choose to make most of the decisions for the
club and pass along your direction to the officers and members below you, or you can create specific
committees, such as membership or academic, and allow each of the committees to make its own decisions
and rules within the overall guidelines set out by the national charter. Consider the need to manage and
evaluate the club and describe which form of organization would you set up for your club and why.

TP2. 9.3 Consider these two companies: Apple and ExxonMobil. Write a summary of your perception of
each company's financial position. Consider the levels of revenue, profitability, and any other financial
measures you feel are relevant. After completing your summary, download Apple's September 30, 2017 annual
report (10-K) (https://openstax.org/l/50Apple2017) and download Exxon Mobil's December 31, 2016 annual
report (10-K) (https://openstax.org/l/50Exxon2017) for more information.

Gather the following information for each company:

                                    Apple                 Apple Data                        9/24/2016  9/26/2015
  Net sales                                                                9/30/2017
  Income before provision for income taxes
  Net income

Table 9.2

                                                          Exxon Mobile Data

                                          Exxon                                       2017  2016       2015
Total revenues and other income
Income before income taxes
Net income attributable to ExxonMobil

Table 9.3

What observations do you have about the financial performance of each company? Calculate the net income %
(also called profit margin %) of each company. What observations do you have? How do these results compare
to your perception of these companies before reviewing the annual reports?
512                                                                               Chapter 9 Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
    10

              Short-Term Decision Making

Figure 10.1 Value Add. Used coffee grounds can add value to a business. (credit left: modification of "Old
coffee grounds to sprinkle on your garden" by Tristan Ferne/Flickr; credit right: modification of "Reusing
coffee grounds" by Montgomery Cty Division of Solid Waste Services's photostream/Flickr)

 Chapter Outline

  10.1 Identify Relevant Information for Decision-Making
  10.2 Evaluate and Determine Whether to Accept or Reject a Special Order
  10.3 Evaluate and Determine Whether to Make or Buy a Component
  10.4 Evaluate and Determine Whether to Keep or Discontinue a Segment or Product
  10.5 Evaluate and Determine Whether to Sell or Process Further
  10.6 Evaluate and Determine How to Make Decisions When Resources Are Constrained

      Why It Matters

   One day, at your part-time job in a local coffee shop, you realize that the employees throw many pounds of
   used coffee grounds in the trash each day. From an environmental perspective, you are concerned because of
   the volume of trash being transferred to the landfill. From a business perspective, you wonder if discarding the
   used grounds is the only option. Could those coffee grounds be used in a profitable manner? After a bit of
   research, you discover that, if prepared in certain ways, used coffee grounds are good as fertilizer, can kill
   insects on some plants, can be used as a body scrub, among other options. A recent radio talk show discussed
   the possibility that coffee grounds could be used as an alternative fuel source, and you learned that coffee
   grounds are actually being used to help fuel buses in London.
   You consider the options for the used coffee grounds and come up with three possibilities for your coffee
   shop: (1) throw away the used grounds; (2) sell the used grounds to a company that will process them into
514                                                                               Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making

fertilizer, bio-fuel, or some other product; or (3) process and package the used grounds for resale in the coffee
shop as fertilizer and bug repellant. What information would you need for your analysis? Which decision would
you choose and why? Are the revenue and cost components the only components of the decision that you
should consider? These and similar issues are the types of questions that the accounting analysis process can
help management address when evaluating short-term decisions.

 10.1 Identify Relevant Information for Decision-Making

Almost everything we do in life results from choosing between alternatives, and the choices we make result in
different consequences. For example, when choosing whether or not to eat breakfast before going to class,
you face two alternatives and two sets of consequences. Eating breakfast means you must get up a little
earlier, have food available, and be willing to prepare the food. Not eating means sleeping in longer, not
having to plan food, and being hungry during class. Just as our lives are fraught with decisions large and small,
the same is true for businesses. Almost every aspect of being in business involves choosing between
alternatives, and each alternative typically has one or more consequences. Understanding how businesses
make decisions paves the way not only to better decision-making processes but potentially to better
outcomes.

Decisions made by businesses can have short-term effects or long-term impacts, or in some situations, both.
Short-term decisions often address a temporary circumstance or an immediate need while long-term
decisions align more with permanent problem solving and meeting strategic goals. Because these two types of
decisions require different types of analyses, we will consider short-term decision-making here and long-term
decision-making in Capital Budgeting Decision. Accounting distinguishes between short-term and long-term
decisions not only because of the difference in the general nature of these decisions but also because the
types of analyses differ significantly between short-term and long-term decision categories. As the time
horizon over which the decision will have an impact expands, more costs become relevant to the decision-
making process. In addition, when a time element is considered, there will be additional factors such as
interest (paid or received) that will have a greater influence on decisions. Table 10.1 provides examples of
short-term and long-term business decisions.

     Examples of Short-Term and Long-Term Business Decisions

     Short-Term Business Decisions                                                Long-Term Business Decisions

     · Accepting a special production order                                       · Buying new equipment versus remodeling old
     · Determining the best product mix from                                         equipment

        current products                                                          · Choosing which products to manufacture
     · Outsourcing a part or service                                              · Expanding into a new area or country
     · Further processing or refining a current                                   · Diversifying by buying another business

        product

Table 10.1 Short-term and long-term business decisions should be analyzed using different frameworks.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making  515

   CONTINUING APPLICATION AT WORK

   Short-Term Decision-Making

   Considering the business challenges facing Gearhead Outfitters, what short-term decisions might the
   company encounter? Remember that the retailer sells men's, women's and children's outdoor clothing,
   footwear, and accessories. Gearhead must carry a certain level and variety of inventory to meet the
   demands of its customers. The company will have to maintain appropriate accounting records to make
   proper business decisions to promote sustainability and growth.

   How might Gearhead be able to compete with larger chains and remain profitable? Will every sale result
   in the anticipated profit to the company? Consider what specialized short-term decision-making
   processes the company may use to meet its goals. Should more of an item than normal be purchased for
   resale to receive a larger discount from the supplier? What information about cost, volume, and profit is
   needed to make a sound business decision in this case? Some items may be sold at a loss (or lesser
   profit) to attract customers to the store. What type of information and accounting system is needed to
   help in this situation? The company requires relevant, consistent, and reliable data to determine the
   proper course of action.

   Short-term decision-making is vital in any business. Consider this concept in relation to Centralized vs.
   Decentralized Management and how a company's approach may affect the decision-making process.
   Discuss possible short-term issues and decisions, management focuses, and whether or not the
   centralized versus decentralized style will aid in company flexibility and success. Also, think in terms of
   how the decision-making process will be evaluated.

Relevant Information for Short-Term Decision-Making

Business decision-making can be outlined as a process that is applied by management with each decision that
is made. The process of decision-making in a managerial business environment can be summed up in these
steps.

 1. Identify the objective or goal. For a business, typically the goal is to maximize revenues or minimize costs.
 2. Identify alternative courses of action that can achieve the goal or address an obstacle that is hindering

      goal achievement.
 3. Perform a comprehensive analysis of potential solutions. This includes identifying revenues, costs,

      benefits, and other financial and qualitative variables.
 4. Decide, based upon the analysis, the best course of action.
 5. Review, analyze, and evaluate the results of the decision.

The first step of the decision-making process is to identify the goal. In the decisions discussed in this course,
the quantitative goal will either be to maximize revenues or to minimize costs. The second step is to identify
the alternative courses of action to achieve the goal. (In the real world, steps one and two may require more
thought and research that you will learn about in advanced cost accounting and management courses.). This
chapter focuses on steps three and four, which involve short-term decision analysis: determining the
appropriate information necessary for making a decision that will impact the company in the short term,
usually 12 months or fewer, and using that information in a proper analysis in order to reach an informed
decision among alternatives. Step five, which involves reviewing and evaluating the decision, is briefly
516                                                                               Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making

addressed with each type of decision analyzed.

Though these same general steps could be used in long-term decision analyses, the nature of long-term
decisions is different. Short-term decisions are typically operational in nature: making versus buying a
component of a product, using scarce resources, selling a product as-is or processing it further into a different
product. It is relatively easy to change a short-term decision with minimal impact on the company. Long-term
decisions are strategic in nature and typically involve large sums of money. The effects of a long-term decision
can have significant financial impact on a company for years. Examples of long-term decisions include
replacing manufacturing equipment, building a new factory, or deciding to eliminate a product line. While
you've learned how managerial accounting classifies, tracks, monitors, and controls costs, managerial
accountants also closely analyze revenues, which are less controllable than costs, but are important in these
decisions. As stated in the first step of the decision-making process, maximizing revenues is usually one of the
goals of an organization. Therefore, making some short-term decisions requires analysis of both costs and
revenues.

In carrying out step three of the managerial decision-making process, a differential analysis compares the
relevant costs and revenues of potential solutions. What does this involve? First, it is important to understand
that there are many types of short-term decisions that a business may face, but these decisions always involve
choosing between alternatives. Examples of these types of decisions include determining whether to accept a
special order; making a product or component versus buying the product or component; performing
additional processing on a product; keeping versus eliminating a product or segment; or determining whether
to take on a new project. In each of these situations, the business should compare the relevant costs and the
relevant revenues of one alternative to the relevant costs and relevant revenues of the other alternative(s).
Therefore, an important step in the differential analysis of potential solutions is to identify the relevant costs
and relevant revenues of the decision.

What does it mean for something to be relevant? In the context of decision-making, something is relevant if it
will influence the decision being made. For example, suppose you have two options for a summer job--either
flagging traffic for a road crew or working for a landscaping company doing lawn care. For either job, you will
be required to have industrial grade sound protectors (plugs or headphones) for your ears. This cost would
not be relevant because it is the same under either alternative, so it will not influence your decision between
the two jobs; it would be considered an irrelevant cost. You also believe your transportation costs will be the
same for either job; thus this would also be an irrelevant cost.

However, if you are required to have steel-toed boots for the road work job but can wear any type of work
boot for the landscaping job, you would need to consider the difference between the costs, or the differential
cost, of these two types of boots. This difference in cost between the two pairs of boots would be designated
as a relevant cost because it influences your decision.

The two jobs also may have differences in revenues, called a differential revenue. Because the differential
revenue influences the decision, it is also a relevant revenue. If both jobs pay the same hourly wage, it would
have an irrelevant revenue, but if the road crew job offers overtime for any time worked over 40 hours, then
this overtime wage has the potential to be a relevant revenue if overtime is a likely occurrence. Looking only at
these differences--of both costs and revenues--between the alternatives, is known as differential analysis.

In conducting these types of analyses between alternatives, the initial focus will be on each quantitative
factor of the analysis--in other words, the component that can be measured numerically. Examples of
quantitative factors in business include sales growth, number of defective parts produced, or number of labor
hours worked. However, in decision-making, it is important also to consider each qualitative factor, which is
one that cannot be measured numerically. For example, using the same summer job scenario, qualitative

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making  517

factors may include the environment in which you would be working (road dust and tar odors versus pollen
and mower exhaust fumes), the amount of time exposed to the sun, the people with whom you will be
working (working with friends versus making new friends), and weather-related issues (both jobs are
outdoors, but could one job send you home for the day due to weather?). Examples of qualitative factors in
business include employee morale, customer satisfaction, and company or brand image. In making short-term
decisions, a business will want to analyze both qualitative and quantitative factors.

In short-term decision-making, revenues are often easier to evaluate than costs. In addition, each alternative
typically only has one possible one revenue outcome even though there are many costs to consider for each
alternative. How do we know if a cost will have an impact on the decision? The starting point is to understand
the various labels that are attached to costs in these decision-making environments.

Avoidable versus Unavoidable Costs

Management must determine if a cost is avoidable or unavoidable because in the short run, only avoidable
costs are relevant for decision-making purposes. An avoidable cost is one that can be eliminated (in whole or
in part) by choosing one alternative over another. For example, assume that a bike shop offers their customers
custom paint jobs for bikes that the customers already own. If they eliminate the service, the cost of the bike
paint could be eliminated. Also assume that they had been employing a part-time painter to do the work. The
painter's compensation would also be an avoidable cost.

An unavoidable cost is one that does not change or go away in the short-run by choosing one alternative over
another. For example, a company might sign a long-term lease on equipment or a production facility. These
types of leases typically don't allow for cancellation, so if this one does not, then their required payments are
unavoidable costs for the duration of the lease.

Variable costs are avoidable costs, since variable costs do not exist if the product is no longer made, or if the
portion of the business (such as a segment or division) that generated the variable costs ceases to operate.
Fixed costs, on the other hand, may be unavoidable, partially unavoidable, or avoidable only in certain
circumstances. Remember that fixed costs tend to remain constant for a period of time and within a relevant
range of production and are not easily eliminated in the short-run. Therefore, most fixed costs also are
unavoidable. If a fixed cost is specific only to one of the alternatives, then that fixed cost also may be
avoidable. Avoidable costs are future costs that are relevant to decision-making. Past costs are never an
avoidable cost.

Recall that we are using a short-term viewpoint to determine whether or not costs are avoidable. In the long
run, virtually all costs are avoidable. For example, assume that a company has a long-term, ten-year lease on a
production facility that cannot be cancelled. For the first ten years it would be noncancelable and thus
unavoidable. But after ten years it would become avoidable.

   YOUR TURN

   AlexCo's Wagons

   AlexCo produces collapsible wagons that are popular with beachgoers, shoppers, gardeners, parents,
   and tailgaters. Annual sales have been 100,000 wagons per year. The retail selling price of each wagon is
518  Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making

     $67.00. To date, AlexCo has produced each of the components used in making the wagons but has been
     approached by DAL, Inc. with an offer to provide the axle and wheel assembly for $18.75 per assembly.
     AlexCo's costs to produce the axle and wheel assembly are $9.00 in direct materials, $6.50 in direct labor,
     $3.57 in variable overhead, and $2.50 in fixed overhead. Twenty-five percent of the fixed overhead is
     avoidable if the assembly is produced by DAL. Should AlexCo continue to make the axle and wheel
     assembly or should it buy the assembly from DAL, Inc.?

     Solution

   Ignoring qualitative factors, it would be more cost effective for AlexCo to buy the axle and wheel
   assembly from DAL, Inc. However, AlexCo should be certain of any qualitative issues and not solely base
   their decision on the quantitative analysis.

Sunk Costs

A sunk cost is one that cannot be avoided because it has already occurred. A sunk cost will not change
regardless of the alternative that management chooses; therefore, sunk costs have no bearing on future
events and are not relevant in decision-making. The basic premise sounds simple enough, but sunk costs are
difficult to ignore due to human nature and are sometimes incorrectly included in the decision-making
process. For example, suppose you have an old car, a hand-me-down from your grandmother, and last year
you spent $1,600 on repairs and new tires and were just told by your mechanic that the car needs $1,200 in
repairs to operate safely. Your goal is to have a safe and reliable car. Your alternatives are to get the repairs
completed or trade in the car for a newer used car.
From a quantitative perspective, you have gathered the following information to help with your decision. The
trade-in value of your old car will be the minimum given by the dealer, or $200. The newer used car will require
you to make monthly payments of $150 for two years. In analyzing your two alternatives, what costs do you
consider? Remember, the $1,600 you have already spent (note the past tense) is a sunk cost; it is a
consequence of a past decision. In this example, the relevant costs for each alternative are the following:
$1,200 in current repair costs to keep your current car or $3,400 (from the 24 payments of $150 minus $200 for
the trade in) to buy a newer used car. Obviously, you also would consider qualitative factors, such as the
sentimental value of your grandmother's car or the excitement of having a newer car.
Sunk costs are most problematic for business decisions when they pertain to existing equipment. The book
value of an asset (historical cost - accumulated depreciation) is a sunk cost regardless of whether a business

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making                                                                                         519

keeps the asset or disposes of it in some manner. The cost of the asset occurred in the past and therefore is
sunk and irrelevant to the decision at hand. Mangers may be reluctant to ignore sunk costs when making
decisions, especially if the prior decision to purchase the asset was an unwise one. Often, when management
takes a path of action that is not achieving the desired results, managers may continue the same path in the
hope that the effect of prior decisions will improve the results. The use of the word prior is a key indicator that
information is nonrelevant to a current decision. Holding on to old decisions or old commitments is common
because letting them go forces management to admit they made a bad decision.

Future Costs That Do Not Differ

Any future cost that does not differ between the alternatives is not a relevant cost for the decision. For
example, if a company is considering baking either bagels or doughnuts and both baked goods require $0.30
worth of flour, then the cost of flour would not be a relevant cost in determining which of the two had the
highest production cost. As relevant information for short-term decision-making, the cost of sound protectors
for your summer job would not be relevant to your decision because that cost exists in both scenarios.
Another irrelevant cost would be your transportation cost, since that cost is also the same regardless of the job
you choose. In another example, if a company is planning to produce either red widgets or blue wingdings
and will need to hire 10 additional employees to produce either of the goods, the cost of those 10 employees is
irrelevant because it does not differ between the alternatives.

   ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

   Johnson & Johnson's 1982 Recall and Replacement of All Tylenol in the World

   In 1982, Johnson & Johnson was faced with a large-scale business and ethical dilemma. During the course
   of several days beginning on September 29, 1982, seven deaths occurred in the Chicago area that were
   attributed to consuming capsules of Extra-Strength Tylenol. The painkiller was, at the time, Johnson &
   Johnson's best-selling product. The company had to decide if the short-term cost of replacing the Tylenol
   was worth the future cost to their reputation and their customer's health and safety. At tremendous
   expense, Johnson & Johnson "placed consumers first by recalling 31 million bottles of Tylenol capsules
   from store shelves and offering replacement product in the safer tablet form free of charge."[1]

   As it was later discovered, someone was lacing Tylenol capsules with cyanide and returning the pills in
   the original packages to store shelves. However, Johnson & Johnson's decision to incur short-term costs
   by recalling all of their pills ultimately paid off, as in the long run, the company's stock value increased
   and Tylenol sales recovered. One could look at the decision as an opportunity cost: Johnson & Johnson
   had to choose between two alternatives. The company could have chosen a short-term solution with
   reduced short-term losses, but by making an ethical business decision, the long-term rewards were
   greater than the short-term savings.

Opportunity Costs

When choosing between two alternatives, usually only one of the two choices can be selected. When this is the

1 Judith Rehak. "Tylenol Made a Hero of Johnson & Johnson: The Recall That Started Them All." New York Times. Mar. 23, 2002.
https://www.nytimes.com/2002/03/23/your-money/IHT-tylenol-made-a-hero-of-johnson-johnson-the-recall-that-started.html
520                                                                               Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making

case, you may be faced with opportunity costs, which are the costs associated with not choosing the other
alternative. For example, if you are trying to choose between going to work immediately after completing your
undergraduate degree or continuing to graduate school, you will have an opportunity cost. If you choose to go
to work immediately, your opportunity cost is forgoing a graduate degree and any potential job limitations or
advancements that result from that decision. If you choose instead to go directly into graduate school, your
opportunity cost is the income that you could have been earning by going to work immediately upon
graduation.

   YOUR TURN

   Costs and Revenue at Carolina Clusters

   Carolina Clusters, Inc., a candy manufacturer in a resort town, just bought a new taffy pulling machine
   for $27,000 and is planning to increase the production of salt-water taffy. Due to the increased
   production, Carolina is deciding between hiring two part-time college students or one full-time
   employee. Each college student would work half days totaling 20 hours per week, and would earn $12
   per hour. The full-time employee would work full days 40 hours per week and would earn $12 per hour
   plus the equivalent of $2 per hour in benefits. Each employee is given two t-shirts to wear as their
   uniform. The t-shirts cost Carolina $8 each. In addition, Carolina provides disposable hair coverings and
   gloves for the employees. Each employee uses, on average, six sets of gloves per eight-hour shift or four
   sets per four-hour shift. One hair covering per shift per person is typical. The cost of the hair covering is
   $0.05 per covering and the cost of a pair of gloves is $0.02 per pair. Identify any relevant costs, relevant
   revenues, sunk costs, and opportunity costs that Carolina Clusters needs to consider in making the
   decision whether to hire two part-time employees or one full-time employee.

   Solution

   Relevant costs:

      · $2 per hour for benefits
      · $16 for two t-shirts: Hiring one full-time person will result in a $16 expenditure for t-shirts. Hiring

          two college students would result in $32 in t-shirt expenditures, thus the relevant t-shirts costs is the
          $16 difference.
      · $0.05 for a hair covering: Hiring one full-time person will result in $0.05 per day in hair covering
          costs but hiring two college students would result in $0.10 per day in hair covering costs thus the
          relevant hair covering cost is the $0.05 difference.
      · $0.04 for a pair of gloves: Hiring one full-time person will result in $0.12 (6 × $0.02) per day in glove
          costs, but hiring two college students would result in $0.16 (8 × $0.02) per day in glove costs. Thus,
          the relevant glove cost is the $0.04 difference.

   Relevant revenues: None

   Sunk costs: $27,000 for the taffy machine

   Opportunity costs: None

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making  521

 10.2 Evaluate and Determine Whether to Accept or Reject a Special Order

Both manufacturing and service companies often receive requests to fill special orders. These special orders
are typically for goods or services at a reduced price and are usually a one-time order that, in the short-run,
does not affect normal sales. When deciding whether to accept a special order, management must consider
several factors:

  · The capacity required to fulfill the special order
  · Whether the price offered by the buyer will cover the cost of producing the products
  · The role of fixed costs in the analysis
  · Qualitative factors
  · Whether the order will violate the Robinson-Patman Act and other fair pricing legislation

Fundamentals of the Decision to Accept or Reject a Special Order

The starting point for making this decision is to assess the company's normal production capacity. The normal
capacity is the production level a company can achieve without adding additional production resources, such
as additional equipment or labor. For example, if the company can produce 10,000 towels a month based on
its current production capacity, and it is currently contracted to produce 9,000 a month, it could not take on a
special one-time order for 3,000 towels without adding additional equipment or workers. Most companies do
not work at maximum capacity; rather, they function at normal capacity, which is a concept related to a
company's relevant range. The relevant range is the quantitative range of units that can be produced based
on the company's current productive assets. These assets can include equipment capacity or its labor capacity.
Labor capacity is typically easier to increase on a short-term basis than equipment capacity. The following
example assumes that labor capacity is available, so only equipment capacity is considered in the example.

Assume that based on a company's present equipment, it can produce 20,000 units a month. Its relevant
range of production would be zero to 20,000 units a month. As long as the units of production fall within this
range, it does not need additional equipment. However, if it wanted to increase production from 20,000 units
to 24,000 units, it would need to buy or lease additional equipment. If production is fewer than 20,000 units,
the company would have unused capacity that could be used to produce additional units for its current
customers or for new clients.

If the company does not have the capacity to produce a special order, it will have to reduce production of
another good or service in order to fulfill the special order or provide another means of producing the goods,
such as hiring temporary workers, running an additional shift, or securing additional equipment. As you will
learn, not having the capacity to fill the special order will create a different analysis than it would if there is
sufficient capacity.

Next, management must determine if the price offered by the buyer will result in enough revenue to cover the
differential costs of producing the items. For example, if price does not meet the variable costs of production,
then accepting the special order would be an unprofitable decision.

Additionally, fixed costs may be relevant if the company is already operating at capacity, as there may be
additional fixed costs, such as the need to run an extra shift, hire an additional supervisor, or buy or lease
additional equipment. If the company is not operating at capacity--in other words, the company has unused
capacity--then the fixed costs are irrelevant to the decision if the special order can be met with this unused
capacity.

Special orders create several qualitative issues. A logical issue is the concern for how existing customers will
522                                                                               Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making

feel if they discover a lower price was offered to the special-order customer. A special order that might be
profitable could be rejected if the company determined that accepting the special order could damage
relations with current customers. If the goods in the special order are modified so that they are cheaper to
manufacture, current customers may prefer the modified, cheaper version of the product. Would this hurt the
profitability of the company? Would it affect the reputation?
In addition to these considerations, sometimes companies will take on a special order that will not cover costs
based on qualitative assessments. For example, the business requesting the special order might be a potential
client with whom the manufacturer has been trying to establish a business relationship and the producer is
willing to take a one-time loss. However, our coverage of special orders concentrates on decisions based on
quantitative factors.
Companies considering special orders must also be aware of the anti-price discrimination rules established in
the Robinson-Patman Act. The Robinson-Patman Act is a federal law that was passed in 1936. Its primary intent
is to prevent some forms of price discrimination in sales transactions between smaller and larger businesses.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   The Robinson-Patman Act prevents large retailers from purchasing goods in bulk at a greater discount
   than smaller retailers are able to obtain them. It helps keep competition fair between large and small
   businesses and is sometimes called the "Anti-Chain Store Act." Read the LegalDictionary.net full
   definition and example of the Robinson-Patman Act (https://openstax.org/l/50RobPatAct) to learn more.

Sample Data

Franco, Inc., produces dental office examination chairs. Franco has the capacity to produce 5,000 chairs per
year and currently is producing 4,000. Each chair retails for $2,800, and the costs to produce a single chair
consist of direct materials of $750, direct labor of $600, and variable overhead of $300. Fixed overhead costs of
$1,350,000 are met by selling the first 3,000 chairs. Franco has received a special order from Ghanem, Inc., to
buy 800 chairs for $1,800. Should Franco accept the special order?

Calculations Using Sample Data

Franco is not operating at capacity and the special order does not take them over capacity. Additionally, all the
fixed costs have already been met. Therefore, when evaluating the special order, Franco must determine if the
special offer price will meet and exceed the costs to produce the chairs. Figure 10.2 details the analysis.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making  523

Figure 10.2 Special Order: Supplier Has Excess Capacity. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Since Franco has already met his fixed costs with current production and since he has the capacity to produce
the additional 800 units, Franco only needs to consider his variable costs for this order. Franco's variable cost
to produce one chair is $1,650. Ghanem is offering to buy the chairs for $1,800 apiece. By accepting the special
order, Franco would meet his variable costs and make $150 per chair. Considering only quantitative factors,
Franco should accept the special offer.

How would Franco's decision change if the factory was already producing at capacity at the time of the special
offer? In other words, assume the corporation is already producing the most it can produce without working
more hours or adding more equipment. Accepting the order would likely mean that Franco would incur
additional fixed costs. Assume that, to fill the order from Ghanem, Franco would have to run an extra shift, and
this would require him to hire a temporary production manager at a cost of $90,000. Assume no other fixed
costs would be incurred. Also assume Franco will incur additional costs related to maintenance and utilities for
this extra shift and estimates those costs will be $70,000. As shown in Figure 10.3, in this scenario, Franco
would have to charge Ghanem at least $1,850 in order to meet his cost.

Figure 10.3 Special Order: Supplier Does Not Have Excess Capacity. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Final Analysis of the Decision

The analysis of Franco's options did not consider any qualitative factors, such as the impact on morale if the
company is already at capacity and opts to implement overtime or hire temporary workers to fill the special
order. The analysis also does not consider the effect on regular customers if management elects to meet the
special order by not fulfilling some of the regular orders. Another consideration is the impact on existing
customers if the price offered for the special order is lower than the regular price. These effects may create a
bad dynamic between the company and its customers, or they may cause customers to seek products from
competitors. As in the example, Franco would need to consider the impact of displacing other customers and
524  Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making

the risk of losing business from regular customers, such as dental supply companies, if he is unable to meet
their orders. The next step is to do an overall cost/benefit analysis in which Franco would consider not only the
quantitative but the qualitative factors before making his final decision on whether or not to accept the special
order.

   THINK IT THROUGH

   Athletic Jersey Special Orders

   Jake's Jerseys has been asked to produce athletic jerseys for a local school district. The special order is for
   1,000 jerseys of varying sizes, and the price offered by the school district is $10 less per jersey than the
   normal $50 market price. The school district interested in the jerseys is one of the largest in the area.
   What quantitative and qualitative factors should Jake consider in making the decision to accept or reject
   the special order?

 10.3 Evaluate and Determine Whether to Make or Buy a Component

One of the most common outsourcing scenarios is one in which a company must decide whether it is going to
make a component that it needs in manufacturing a product or buy that component already made. For
example, all of the components of the iPhone are made by companies other than Apple. Ford buys truck and
automobile seats, as well as many other components and individual parts, from various suppliers and then
assembles them at Ford factories. With each component, Ford must decide if it is more cost effective to make
that component internally or to buy that component from an external supplier.

This type of analysis is also relevant to the service industry; for example, ADP provides payroll and data
processing services to over 650,000 companies worldwide. Or a law firm may decide to hire certain research
activities to be completed by outside experts rather than hire the necessary staff to keep that function in-
house. These are all examples of outsourcing. Outsourcing is the act of using another company to provide
goods or services that your company requires.

Many companies outsource some of their work, but why? Consider this scenario: Today, while driving home
from class, one of your car's engine warning lights goes on. You will most likely take your car to an auto repair
specialist to have it analyzed and repaired, whereas your grandfather might have popped the hood, grabbed
his toolbox, and attempted to diagnose and fix the problem himself. Why? It is often a matter of expertise and
sometimes simply a matter of cost benefit. In your grandfather's time, car engines were more mechanical and
less electronic, which made learning to repair cars a simpler process that required less expertise and only
basic tools. Today, your car has many electronic components and often requires sophisticated monitors to
assess the problem and may involve the replacement of computer chips or electronic sensors. Thus, you opt to
outsource the repair of your car to someone who has the knowledge and facilities to provide the repair more
cost effectively than you could if you did it yourself. Your grandfather likely could have made the repair to his
car several decades ago as cheaply as the mechanic with only a sacrifice of his time. To your grandfather, the
cost of his time was worth the benefit of completing the repair himself.

Companies outsource for the same reasons. Many companies have found that it is more cost effective to
outsource certain activities, such as payroll, data storage, and web design and hosting. It is more efficient to

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making  525

pay an outside expert than to hire the appropriate staff to keep a particular task inside the company.

Fundamentals of the Decision to Make or to Buy

As with other decisions, the make-versus-buy decision involves both quantitative and qualitative analysis. The
quantitative component requires cost analysis to determine which alternative is more cost effective. This cost
analysis can be performed by looking at the cost to buy the component versus the cost to produce the
component, which allows us to make a decision based on an analysis of unavoidable costs. For example, the
costs to produce will include direct materials, direct labor, variable overhead, and fixed overhead. If the
business chooses to buy the component instead, the avoidable costs will go away but unavoidable costs will
remain and would need to be considered as part of the cost to buy the component.

Sample Data

Thermal Mugs, Inc., manufactures various types of leak-proof personal drink carriers. Thermal's T6 container,
its most insulated carrier, maintains the temperature of the liquid inside for 6 hours. Thermal has designed a
new lid for the T6 carrier that allows for easier drinking and pouring. The cost to produce the new lid is $2.19:

Plato Plastics has approached Thermal and offered to produce the 120,000 lids Thermal will require for current
production levels of the T6 carrier, at a unit price of $1.75 each. Is this a good deal? Should Thermal buy the
lids from Plato rather than produce them themselves? Initially, the $1.75 presented by Plato seems like a much
better price than the $2.19 that it would cost Thermal to produce the lids. However, more information about
the relevant costs is necessary to determine whether the offer by Plato is the better offer. Remember that all
the variable costs of producing the lid will only exist if the lid is produced by Thermal, thus the variable costs
(direct materials, direct labor, and variable overhead) are all relevant costs that will differ between the
alternatives.

What about the fixed costs? Assume all the fixed costs are not tied directly to the production of the lid and
therefore will still exist even if the lid is purchased externally from Plato. This means the fixed costs of $0.51
per unit are unavoidable and therefore are not relevant.

Calculations Using Sample Data

Calculations show that when the relevant costs are compared between the two alternatives, it is more cost
effective for Thermal to produce the 120,000 units of the T6 lid internally than to purchase it from Plato.
526  Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making

By producing the T6 lid internally, Thermal can save $8,400 ($210,000 - $201,600). How would the analysis
change if a portion of the fixed costs were avoidable? Suppose that, of the $0.51 in fixed costs per unit of the
T6 lid, $0.12 of those fixed costs are associated with interest costs and insurance expenses and thus would be
avoidable if the T6 lid is purchased externally rather than produced internally. How does that change the
analysis?

In this scenario, it is more cost effective for Thermal to buy the T6 lid from Plato, as Thermal would save $6,000
($216,000 - $210,000).

Final Analysis of the Decision

The difference in these two presentations of the data emphasizes the importance of defining which costs are
relevant, as improper cost identification can lead to bad decisions.
These analyses only considered the quantitative factors in a make-versus-buy decision, but there are
qualitative factors to consider as well, including:

  · Will the T6 lid made by Plato meet the quality requirements of Thermal?
  · Will Plato continue to produce the T6 lid at the $1.75 price, or is this a teaser rate to obtain the business,

      with the plan for the rate to go up in the future?
  · Can Plato continue to produce the quantity of the lids desired? If more or fewer are needed from Plato, is

      the adjusted production level obtainable, and does it affect the cost?
  · Does using Plato to produce the lids displace Thermal workers or hamper morale?
  · Does using Plato to produce the lids affect the reputation of Thermal?
In addition, if the decision is to buy the lid, Thermal is dependent on Plato for quality, timely delivery, and cost
control. If Plato fails to deliver the lids on time, this can negatively affect Thermal's production and sales. If the
lids are of poor quality, returns, replacements, and the damage to Thermal's reputation can be significant.
Without long-term agreements on price increases, Plato can increase the price they charge Thermal, thus
making the entire drink container more expensive and less profitable. However, buying the lid likely means
that Thermal has excess production capacity that can now be applied to making other products. If Thermal

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making                                                                527

chooses to make the lid, this consumes some of the productive capacity and may affect the relationship
Thermal has with the outside supplier if that supplier is already working with Thermal on other products.

Make versus buy, one of many outsourcing decisions, should involve assessing all relevant costs in conjunction
with the qualitative issues that affect the decision or arise because of the choice. Although it may appear that
these types of outsourcing decisions are difficult to resolve, companies throughout the world make these
decisions daily as part of the company's strategic plan, and therefore, each company must weigh the
advantages and disadvantages of outsourcing production of goods and services. Some examples are shown in
Table 10.2.

                                       Advantages and Disadvantages of Outsourcing

Advantages of Outsourcing                   Disadvantages of Outsourcing

· Utilizes external expertise, removes the  · Takes away control over quality and timing of
   need for in-house expertise                 production

· Frees up capacity for other uses          · May limit ability to upsize or downsize production
· Frees up capital for other uses           · May have hidden costs and/or a lack of stability of
· Allows management to focus on
                                               price
   competitive strengths                    · May diminish innovation
· Transfers some production and             · Often makes it difficult to bring the production back

   technological risks to supplier             in-house once it has been removed

Table 10.2

In an outsourcing decision, the relevant costs and qualitative issues should be analyzed thoroughly. If there
are no qualitative issues that affect the decision and the leasing or purchasing price is less than the relevant
(avoidable) costs of producing the good or service in house, the company should outsource the product or
service. The following example demonstrates this issue for a service entity.

Lake Law has ten lawyers on staff who handle workers' compensation and workplace discrimination lawsuits.
Lake has an excellent success rate and frequently wins large settlements for their clients. Because of the size
of their settlements, many clients are interested in establishing trusts to manage the investing and distribution
of the funds. Lake Law does not have a trust or estate lawyer on staff and is debating between hiring one or
using an attorney at a nearby law firm that specializes in wills, trusts, and estates to handle the trusts of Lake's
clients. Hiring a new attorney would require $120,000 in salary for the attorney, an additional 20% in benefits, a
legal assistant for the new attorney for 20 hours per week at a cost of $20 per hour, and conversion of a
storage room into an office. Lake spent $100,000 on redecorating the offices last year and has sufficient
furniture for a new office. The attorney at the nearby firm would charge a retainer of $50,000 plus $200 per
hour worked on each trust. The retainer is in addition to the $200 per hour charge for work on trusts. The
average trust takes 10 hours to complete and Lake estimates approximately 50 trusts per year. In addition, an
external attorney would charge $500 for each trust to cover office expenses and filing fees. Which option
should Lake choose?

To determine the solution, first, find the relevant costs for hiring internally and for using an external attorney.
528  Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making

Based on the quantitative analysis, Lake should hire an estate attorney to have on staff. For the year, the firm
would save $10,200 ($164,800 for internal versus $175,000 with the external attorney) by going with the
internal hire. Other potential advantages would be that an in-house attorney could complete more than the
estimated 50 trusts without incurring additional costs, and by keeping the work in-house, it helps to build the
relationship between the firm and the clients. A disadvantage would be if there is not sufficient work to keep
the in-house attorney busy, the company would still have to pay the $120,000 salary plus the additional costs
of $44,800 for benefits and the legal assistant's salary, even if the attorney is working at less than full capacity.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   The iPhone is the ultimate example of outsourcing. Though created in the United States, it is produced all
   around the globe, with thousands of parts supplied by over 200 suppliers--none of which is Apple. Read
   this article from The New York Times on where parts for the iPhone are made (https://openstax.org/l/
   50iPhoneParts) to learn how an iPhone gets from the design phase in the United States to production of
   components around the world, to assembly in China, and then back to the United States for sale in a
   retail store.

 10.4 Evaluate and Determine Whether to Keep or Discontinue a Segment or
Product

Companies tend to divide their organization along product lines, geographic locations, or other management
needs for decision-making and reporting. A segment is a portion of the business that management believes
has sufficient similarities in product lines, geographic locations, or customers to warrant reporting that portion
of the company as a distinct part of the entire company. For example, General Electric, Inc., has eight
segments and the Walt Disney Company has four segments. Table 10.3 shows these segments.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making                                                           529

    General Electric Segments          Examples of Company Segments

· Additive                                                                     Disney Segments
· Aviation
· Capital                                        · Media Networks
· Digital                                        · Parks, Experiences, and Consumer Products
· Healthcare                                     · Studio Entertainment
· Lighting                                       · Direct to Consumer and International
· Power
· Renewable Energy
· Transportation

Table 10.3 Examples of Company Segments[2]

As part of the normal operations of a business, managers make decisions such as whether to keep producing
a product, whether to continue operating in certain areas, or whether to close entire segments of their
operations. These are historically some of the most difficult decisions that managers make. Examples of these
types of decisions include Macy's decision to close 100 stores in 2016 due to increased competition from online
retailers such as Amazon.com[3] and Delta Airline's decision to eliminate 16 routes to save costs.[4] What
information does management use in making these types of decisions?

As with other decisions, management must consider both the quantitative and qualitative aspects. In choosing
between alternatives--that is, in choosing between keeping and eliminating the product, segment, or
service--the relevant revenues and costs should be analyzed. Remember that relevant revenues and costs are
those that differ between alternatives. Often, the keep-versus-eliminate decision arises because the product or
segment appears to be generating less of a profit than in prior periods or is unprofitable. In these situations,
the product or segment may produce a positive contribution margin but may appear to have a lower or
negative profit because of the allocation of common fixed costs.

Fundamentals of the Decision to Keep or Discontinue a Segment or Product

Two basic approaches can be used to analyze data in this type of decision. One approach is to compare
contribution margins and fixed costs. In this method, the contribution margins with and without the segment
(or division or product line) are determined. The two contribution margins are compared and the alternative
with the greatest contribution margin would be the chosen alternative because it provides the biggest
contribution toward meeting fixed costs.

The second approach involves calculating the total net income for retaining the segment and comparing it to
the total net income for dropping the segment. The company would then proceed with the alternative that has
the highest net income. In order to perform these net income calculations, the company would need more
information than they would need in order to follow the contribution margin approach, which does not

2 GE Businesses. n.d. https://www.ge.com/; Disney. "Our Businesses." n.d. https://www.thewaltdisneycompany.com/about/#our-businesses
3 Hayley Peterson. "Macy's May Shut Down Even More Stores." Business Insider. May 12, 2017. http://www.businessinsider.com/macys-might-
shut-down-more-stores-2017-5
4 Jason Williams. "Delta Downsizing Flights to 14 More Cities." Cincinnati.com. Mar. 11, 2015. http://www.cincinnati.com/story/news/2015/03/
10/delta-cincinnati-airline-cuts-kentucky/24701445/
530  Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making

consider the costs and revenues that are the same between the alternatives.

   THINK IT THROUGH

   Allocating Common Fixed Costs

   Acme, Co., has three retail divisions: Small, Medium, and Large. Sales, variable costs, and fixed costs for
   each of the divisions are:

   Included in the fixed costs are $5,400,000 in allocated common costs, which are split evenly among the
   three divisions. Is an even split the best way to allocate those costs? Why or why not? What other ways
   might Acme consider using to allocate the common fixed costs?

Sample Data

Suppose SnowBucks, Inc., has three product lines: snow boots, snow sporting equipment, and a clothing line
for winter sports. It has been brought to senior management's attention that the snow boot product line is
unprofitable. Figure 10.4 shows the data presented to senior management:

Figure 10.4 Operating Income Report for SnowBucks, by Segment. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Upon initial review, it appears that the snow boot product line is unprofitable. Should this product line be
eliminated? To adequately analyze this situation, a proper analysis of the relevant revenues and costs must be
made. The functional income statement in Figure 10.4 does not separate relevant from non-relevant costs.
In conducting the analysis, the accounting team discovers that each product line is allocated certain costs over
which the product line managers have no control. These allocated costs are typically associated with areas of
the company that do not generate revenue but are necessary for the running of the organization, such as

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making  531

salaries for executives, human resources, and accounting at headquarters.
The cost of these parts of the organization must somehow be shared with the revenue-generating portions of
the business. Companies often allocate these costs to other parts of the organization based on some formula,
such as dividing the total costs by the number of divisions or segments, as percentage of total revenue, or as
percentage of total square footage.
SnowBucks currently allocates these costs equally to the three product lines, and all the fixed selling and
administrative expenses are considered allocated costs. In addition, the fixed manufacturing expenses
represent factory rent, depreciation, and insurance, and all these costs will continue to exist regardless of
whether the snow boot division continues. However, included in the fixed manufacturing expenses is the
$75,000 salary of a sales supervisor for each division. This is an avoidable fixed cost as this cost would no
longer exist if any division ceased operating.

Calculations Using Sample Data

Based on the new information, a new analysis using a product line margin indicates the following:

Final Analysis of the Decision

This new analysis shows that when the relevant costs and revenues are considered, it is apparent the snow
boot product line is contributing toward meeting the fixed costs of the organization and therefore to overall
corporate profitability. The reason the snow boot product line was showing an operating loss was due to the
allocation of common costs. Consideration should be given to the way allocated costs are assigned to the
various products to determine if the allocation is logical or if another allocation method, such as one based on
each product line's percentage of the total corporate sales, would provide a better matching of costs and
services provided by corporate headquarters. Management should also consider qualitative factors, such as
the impact of removing one product line on the overall sales of the other products. If customers commonly
buy snow boots and skis together, then discontinuing the snow boot line could impact the sales of snow skis.
532  Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making

     YOUR TURN

     View Walt Disney Company's 2018 full year earnings report (https://openstax.org/l/50DisneyEarn) on
     their website. Scroll to the section on Segment Results and answer these questions:

      A. How many segments does Disney have?
      B. Which segment had the highest revenue in 2018?
      C. Which segment had the highest operating income in 2018?
      D. Which segment has shown the most revenue growth between 2017 and 2018?
      E. How many segments showed growth in operating income between 2017 and 2018 and how many

           segments showed a decline in operating income between 2017 and 2018?
      F. Which segment has shown the least operating income growth between 2017 and 2018?

     Solution

      A. Four: Media Networks, Parks & Resorts, Studio Entertainment, and Consumer Products & Interactive
           Media

      B. Media Networks
      C. Media Networks
      D. Studio Entertainment
      E. Two segments (Parks & Resorts and Studio Entertainment) showed operating income growth, while

           two segments (Media Networks and Consumer Products & Interactive Media) showed a decline in
           operating income between 2017 and 2018.
      F. Consumer Products & Interactive Media

 10.5 Evaluate and Determine Whether to Sell or Process Further

One major decision a company has to make is to determine the point at which to sell their product--in other
words, when it is no longer cost effective to continue processing the product before sale. For example, in
refining oil, the refined oil can be sold at various stages of the refining process. The point at which some
products are removed from production and sold while others receive additional processing is known as the
split-off point. As you have learned, the relevant revenues and costs must be evaluated in order to make the
best decision for the company.
In making the decision, a company must consider the joint costs, or those costs that have been shared by
products up to the split-off point. In some manufacturing processes, several end products are produced from
a single raw material input. For example, once milk has been processed it can be sold as milk or it can be
processed further into cheese, yogurt, cream, or ice cream. The costs of processing the milk to the stage at
which it can be sold or processed further are the joint costs. These costs are allocated among all the products
that are sold at the split off point as well as those products that are processed further. Ice cream has the basic
costs of the milk plus the costs of processing it further into ice cream.
As another example, suppose a company that makes leather jackets realizes it has a reasonable amount of
unused leather from the cutting of the patterns for the jackets. Typically, this scrap leather is sold, but the
company is beginning to consider using the scrap to make leather belts. How would the company allocate the
costs incurred from processing and preparing the leather before cutting it if they decide to make both the

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making  533

jackets and the belts? Would it be financially beneficial to process the scrap leather further into belts?

Fundamentals of the Decision to Sell or Process Further

When facing the choice of selling or processing further, the company must determine the revenues that would
be received if the product is sold at the split-off point versus the net revenues that would be received if the
product is processed further. This requires knowing the additional costs of further processing. In general, if
the differential revenue from further processing is greater than the differential costs, then it will be profitable
to process a joint product after the split-off point. Any costs incurred prior to the split-off point are irrelevant
to the decision to process further as those are sunk costs; only future costs are relevant costs.

Even though joint product costs are common costs, they are routinely allocated to the joint products. A
potential reason for this treatment is the GAAP (generally accepted accounting principles) requirement that all
production costs must be inventoried.

Be aware that some complexities can arise when allocating joint product costs. The first issue is that joint
production costs can be allocated based on varying production and sales characteristics or assumptions. For
example, a physical measurement method, a relative sales value method at the point of split-off, and a net
realizable value method based on additional processing after the split-off point can all be used to allocate joint
production costs.

A second complexity is that eliminating the production of one or more joint products will not always enable
the company to reduce joint production costs. Because of the mechanics of the common cost allocation
process, such an action will only work if reductions are made in all of the joint products collectively. If only
some of the joint products are eliminated, the remaining joint product or products would absorb all of the
joint product costs.

An example of this last issue might help clarify the point. Assume that you have a lumber production company
that cuts trees, prepares board lumber for housing and furniture, and also prepares sawdust and wood scraps
that is used in the production of particle board. Assume that in a given year the company experienced
$1,100,000 in joint costs. Using one of the three previously mentioned cost allocation methods, the company
allocated $1,000,000 in joint costs to the production of board lumber and $100,000 to the production of wood
scraps and sawdust.

Assume that in the next year it also experienced $1,100,000 in joint costs. However, in that year, the company
lost its buyer of wood scraps and sawdust, so it had to give both of them away, without generating any
revenue. In this case, the company would still realize $1,100,000 in joint costs. However, the entire amount
would be allocated to the production of the board lumber. The only way to reduce the joint costs is to realize
joint costs of less than $1,000,000.

   YOUR TURN

   Luxury Leathers

   Luxury Leathers, Inc., produces various leather accessories, such as belts and wallets. In the process of
   cutting out the leather pieces for each product, 400,000 pounds of scrap leather is produced. Luxury has
   been selling this leather scrap to Sammy's Scrap Procurement for $2.25 per pound. Luxury has an
534  Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making

     employee suggestion box and one of the suggestions was to use most of the scrap to make leather
     watch bands. The management of Luxury is interested in this idea as the machines necessary to produce
     the watch bands are the same as the ones used in making belts and would merely need reprogramming
     for the cutting and stitching processes on the watch bands. The process to attach the buckle would be
     the same for the watch bands as it was for the belts, thus this would require no additional worker
     training. Luxury would have additional costs for new packaging and for the supply and insertion of the
     pins that connect the band to the watch. The total variable cost to produce the watch band would be
     $2.85. Fixed costs would increase by $85,000 per year for the lease of the packaging equipment, and
     Luxury estimates it could produce and sell 100,000 watch bands per year. Finished watch bands could be
     sold for $15.00 each. Should Luxury continue to sell the scrap leather or should Luxury process the scrap
     into watch bands to sell?

     Solution

   Luxury should process the leather scrap further into watch bands. Not only does the act of processing
   the scrap further result in an increase in operating income, it offers Luxury another product line that may
   draw customers to its other products.

Sample Data

Ainsley's Apples grows organic apples and sells them to national grocery chains, local grocers, and markets.
Ainsley purchased a machine for $450,000 that sorts the apples by size. The largest apples are sold as loose
apples to the various stores, the medium sized apples are bagged and sold to the grocers in their bagged
state, and the smallest apples are sold to deep discounters or to a local manufacturing plant that processes
the apples into applesauce. Ainsley is considering keeping the small apples and processing them into apple
juice that would be sold under Ainsley's own label to local grocers. The small apples currently sell to the deep
discounters and local manufacturers for $1.10 per dozen. The variable cost to prepare the small apples for
sale, including transporting the apples, is $0.30 per dozen. Ainsley can sell each gallon of organic apple juice
for $3.50 per gallon. It takes two dozen small apples to make one gallon of apple juice. The cost to produce the
organic apple juice will be $0.60 variable cost per gallon plus $200,000 fixed costs for the one-year lease of the
equipment needed to make and bottle the juice. Ainsley normally harvests and sells 2,400,000 small apples per
year. Should Ainsley continue to sell the small apples to local grocers and the applesauce manufacturer or

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making                                                                           535

should Ainsley process the apples further into organic apple juice?

Calculations of Sample Data

In order to decide whether or not to process the small apples or to process them further into applesauce,
Ainsley conducts an analysis of the relevant revenues and costs for the two alternatives: sell at split-off or
process further into applesauce.

Ainsley should continue to sell the apples at split-off rather than process them further, as selling them
generates a $160,000 increase in operating income compared to only $90,000 if she processes the apples
further.

Final Analysis of the Decision

When making the decision to sell or process further, the company also must consider that processing a
product further may create a new successful market or it may undercut sales of already existing products. For
example, a furniture manufacturer that sells unfinished furniture may lose sales of the unfinished pieces if it
decides to stain some pieces and sell them as finished products.

   THINK IT THROUGH

   Disposing of Coffee Grounds

   Return to Why It Matters in this chapter. With the knowledge you have gained thus far, answer these
   questions:

     1. From your perspective, what are the alternatives for the used coffee grounds?
     2. For the alternatives listed in question 1, what information do you need to evaluate between the

          alternatives?
     3. What type of analysis would you do to choose between alternatives?
     4. What qualitative factors might influence your decision regarding which alternative to select?
     5. Do you think the quantitative and qualitative components both will lead you to the same decision?

          Why or why not?
536                                                                               Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making

 10.6 Evaluate and Determine How to Make Decisions When Resources Are
Constrained

Companies use various resources to be productive. These resources, which include time, labor, space, and
machines, are limited, thus constraining the ability of a company to have unlimited productive capacity. For
example, a retail store is constrained by the amount of floor space available to display its goods, while a law
office may be constrained by the number of hours the paralegal team can feasibly work. These constraints
require companies to make decisions on the best ways to allocate their resources in a way that maximizes the
benefit to the firm. This situation is especially true when a company is operating at capacity or makes multiple
products or provides multiple services.

The question as to which products and how many should be made is a common constraint problem. For
example, consider a business that runs at capacity, making four products by running two eight-hour shifts per
day, seven days a week for 50 weeks per year. This business is limited to 5,600 working hours per year (8 hr.
shifts × 2 shifts × 7 days per week × 50 weeks) unless a third shift is added. Adding a third shift may be
prohibitive for any number of reasons, including local ordinances that prevent operating twenty-four hours a
day, Environmental Protection Agency constraints, or the down-time of the machines that is required several
hours a day for maintenance and calibration. What is the best way for this company to use these work hours?
Which products should it produce first and how many of each should it produce?

These types of situations constrain, or limit, management's ability to use their facilities and workforce. Having
limited availability of a resource, such as time, labor, or machine hours means that item becomes a scarce
resource. A constraint is a scarce resource that limits the output or productive capacity of the organization.

Ordinarily, there are very few actual constraints in any process. Sometimes, there is only one. However, the
existence of a constraint can have a major effect on the productivity of an organization. This fact applies to all
types of entities, such as production facilities or service providers. One way to view this issue is to consider the
old cliché that a chain is only as strong as its weakest link. In the example, when trying to measure or estimate
an organization's maximum efficiency, its results will often be reduced by the overall negative effects of the
constraints. When the constraint slows production, it is called a bottleneck. Managers are often faced with the
problem of deciding how to best use a scarce resource to prevent bottlenecks. Under the constraint of limited
resources, how do managers make decisions when they are working within these conditions?

Fundamentals of How to Make Decisions When Resources are Constrained

As with other short-term decisions, a company must consider the relevant costs and revenues when making
decisions when resources are constrained. Whether the organization facing a constraint is a merchandising,
manufacturing, or service organization, the initial step in allocating scarce or constrained resources is to
determine the unit contribution margin, which is the selling price per unit minus the variable cost per unit,
for each product or service. The company should produce or provide the products or services that generate
the highest contribution margin first, followed by those with the second highest, and so forth. The total
contribution margin will be maximized by promoting those products or accepting those orders with the
highest contribution margin in relation to the scarce resource. In other words, products or services should be
ranked based on their unit contribution margin per production restraint, which is the unit contribution
margin divided by the production restraint.

If constraints are not managed, a bottleneck usually results, meaning that production slows and a back-up
occurs at stages prior to the bottleneck. For example, in producing boxes of cereal, if the cereal is produced at

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making  537

a rate of 1,000 ounces per minute but the bagging machines can only bag 800 ounces per minute, this will
create a bottleneck. Similarly, if on a Saturday morning before a home football game, the local grocery store
has ten checkout lines but only opens four of them, long lines will result from the constraint of too few
checkout lanes available. Management must decide how many scarce resources (employees, in this example)
to pull from stocking the shelves to running cash registers. It may be difficult to see how bottlenecks affect
profitability, and they appear to be more of a timing or throughput issue. But bottlenecks can affect
profitability in a number of ways. Bottlenecks at the grocery story can result in customers leaving to store shop
elsewhere or can negatively affect the reputation of the store, which can impact future sales. In the cereal
example, bottlenecks in the packaging area can slow the delivery of boxes of cereal to distributors and
individual stores. Poor or inconsistent delivery may drive customers to purchase from other cereal
manufacturers, which would have a definite impact on profitability.

A common problem relating to constraints occurs in multi-product production environments. Management
will need to evaluate the constraints to determine the best mix of products that will minimize the effects of the
constraints. In addition to making sure that the best product mix is chosen, managers should seek ways to
increase the effective capacity of the constraint. Conceptually, there are two ways a company can do this:
increase the rate of output at the bottleneck, or increase the time available at the bottleneck. Increasing the
capacity of the constraint or bottleneck is also called relaxing the constraint or elevating the constraint. Some
specific examples of ways to relax the constraint include:

  · Keep the production facilities open longer hours. This may allow the work-flow through the bottleneck
      area to be slowed and thus prevent the bottleneck from occurring. However, this may require paying
      workers overtime pay.

  · If working extra hours is not a viable option, then moving additional workers to the bottleneck area may
      be beneficial as long as the areas from which they were moved are adequately covered and additional
      problem areas do not result.

  · Instead of using current workers, additional staff may be hired to smooth the work flow through the
      bottleneck area.

  · Outsource some or all of the work in the area of the bottleneck. It may be cheaper and more cost effective
      to buy parts of components than to slow production due to the bottleneck.

  · Redesign the production process to prevent the bottleneck by adding more resources to eliminate the
      bottleneck, reorganizing the process to distribute the bottleneck-causing activities to different parts of the
      production process, or managing processing times at other stages prior to the bottleneck to help prevent
      the bottleneck form occurring.

  · Insuring a minimal number of defects and rework, since they typically slow the production process and
      thus add to the bottleneck.

Preventing and minimizing bottlenecks can have significant benefits to the bottom line of the company. The
reduction of bottlenecks allows the company to move more products through the production phase and thus
be ready to sell.
538  Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making

   ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

   When to Include a Lifesaving Option: The Case of the Ford Pinto

   The case of the fiery Ford Pinto demonstrates that more than cost and revenue should be considered
   when making an ethical business decision. In the early 1970s, the Ford Motor Company set out to build a
   Pinto for less than $2,000. Cars were much less expensive then, and Ford had to determine whether or
   not to include a component part that cost around $10. Given the high cost, Ford decided not to include
   the component, a rubber bladder for the gas tank. However, in rear-end collisions at over 21 miles per
   hour, the rubber bladder component functions to prevent the gas tank from flooding the interior of the
   car with gasoline and gas fumes. Because of the decision not to include the component, a number of
   Pintos involved in collisions exploded into flames, injuring and sometimes killing the occupants.
   Although Ford was aware of the defect, the company's cost/benefit analysis indicated it was less
   expensive to build Pintos without the rubber bladder, even when including expected reimbursement
   costs for anyone injured or killed. However, the decision to allow a defective product to be built in order
   to reduce overall costs caused a significant hit to Ford's reputation. Ultimately, the litigation costs for
   knowingly constructing a defective car were higher than the original cost of including the rubber bladder
   component. While Ford's decision seemed profitable in the short-term, their financial analysis could have
   been improved if it also took into account long-term impacts.

Sample Data

Wood World, Inc., produces wooden desks, chairs, and bookcases. These items are produced using the same
machines, and there is a maximum of 80,000 machine-hours available during the year. The information about
the production time and costs for these three items is:

Wood World is limited in producing its products by the number of possible machine-hours. Orders have been
received for 60,000 desks, 48,000 chairs, and 40,000 bookcases, which will require 94,000 machine-hours to
produce. Since there are not enough machine-hours available to fill all of the orders, which orders should
Wood World fill first?

Calculations Using Sample Data

To address this question, Wood World must find the contribution margin per machine-hour since machine-
hours are the constraining factor for production.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making  539

Final Analysis of the Decisions

Wood World should fulfill the orders for bookcases first, desks second, and chairs last. The bookcases provide
the highest contribution margin per machine-hour, followed by desks and then chairs. Maximizing the
contribution margin per constraint, in this case per machine-hour, is the best way for Wood World to manage
the constraint. How many of each item will be produced?

Therefore, based on contribution margin and the constraint of machine hours, Wood World should fill all
40,000 of the bookcase orders first, then fill the 60,000 desk orders and, and fill 20,000 of the chair orders last.
Are there any qualitative issues that Wood World should consider? One concern may be that customers who
typically buy a desk and chair together may not be able to do so if the chair production is affected by a
bottleneck. Another qualitative issue in keeping with the furniture example is that a company might find
producing dining room tables to be significantly more profitable than matching chairs or matching cupboards.
However, they will still be required to produce the less profitable chairs and cupboards, because many
consumers will want to buy all three items as a set.
The benefits of effectively managing constraints can be enormous. Managers need to understand the positive
impact effective management of constrained resources can have on the company's bottom line. The
contribution margin per unit of the scarce resource can be used to assess the value of relaxing the constraint.
When there is unsatisfied demand for a single product because of a constraint, the value of additional time on
the constraint is simply the contribution margin per unit of the scarce resource for that product. When there
are two or more products with unsatisfied demand, the value of additional time on the bottleneck would be
the largest contribution margin per unit of the scarce resource for any product whose demand is unsatisfied.
In many situations, when dealing with conflicting time constraints an evaluation of multiple bottlenecks might
identify a viable solution. While many bottleneck issues and their solutions could be somewhat complex,
others might be addressed more simply. For example, in some cases the problem might be solved by the
addition of an additional work shift.
540                                                                               Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making

     CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

     Distributing Caseloads at a Law Firm

     As a new business school graduate, you landed you first job in the human resources department of large
     national law firm in New York City. Your position is providing you with many opportunities to learn about
     the company and the various tasks for which the human resources department is responsible. Your most
     recent assignment is to determine the best way to distribute caseloads to the junior level attorneys
     based on their areas of expertise and to assign paralegal hours to assist the junior level attorneys. What
     are the constraints with which you are dealing? What information do you need to properly complete this
     assignment? What type of analysis would be required to effectively allocate caseload hours?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making  541

     Key Terms

allocated costs costs that are generated by non-revenue generating portions of the business, such as
     corporate headquarters, that are assigned based on some formula to the revenue generating portions of
     the business

avoidable cost cost that can be eliminated (in whole or in part) by choosing one alternative over another
bottleneck point at which a constraint slows production
constraint scarce resource that limits output or productive capacity of an organization
differential analysis type of analysis that considers only the differences between variables that are

     important to the analysis
differential cost difference between costs for alternatives
differential revenue difference between revenues for alternatives
irrelevant cost cost that has no effect on the decision being made because it is the same under either

     alternative
irrelevant revenue revenue that has no effect on the decision being made
joint costs costs that have been shared by products up to the split-off point
normal capacity company's maximum production level, without adding additional production resources, or

     within the company's relevant range
opportunity costs costs associated with not choosing the other alternative
outsourcing act of using another company to provide goods or services that your company requires
qualitative factor component of a decision-making process that cannot be measured numerically
quantitative factor component of a decision-making process that can be measured numerically
relevant cost cost that influences the decision being made
relevant range quantitative range of units that can be produced based on the company's current productive

     assets; for example, if a company has sufficient fixed assets to produce up to 10,000 units of product, the
     relevant range would be between 0 and 10,000 units
relevant revenue revenue that influences the decision being made
segment portion of the business that management believes has sufficient similarities in product lines,
     geographic locations, or customers to warrant reporting that portion of the company as a distinct part of
     the entire company
short-term decision analysis determining the appropriate elements of information necessary for making a
     decision that will impact the company in the short term, usually 12 months or fewer, and using that
     information in a proper analysis in order to reach an informed decision among alternatives
special order one-time order that does not typically affect current sales
split-off point point at which some products are removed from production and sold while others receive
     additional processing
sunk cost cost that cannot be avoided because it has already occurred
unavoidable cost cost that does not go away in the short-run by choosing one alternative over another
unit contribution margin selling price per unit minus variable cost per unit
unit contribution margin per production restraint unit contribution margin divided by the production
     restrain

     Summary

10.1 Identify Relevant Information for Decision-Making
542                                                                               Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making

  · Decision-making involves choosing between alternatives.
  · A critical step in the decision-making process is identification of all the relevant information for each

      alternative. Relevant information is any information that would have an impact on the decision.
  · Relevant information can come in the form of costs or revenues, or be nonfinancial in form. For

      information regarding costs, this means determining which costs are avoidable and which are
      unavoidable.

10.2 Evaluate and Determine Whether to Accept or Reject a Special Order
  · Deciding to accept or reject a special order is a choice between alternatives.
  · Accepting or rejecting a special order involves comparing the purchase price associated with the special
      order to the cost to produce the items.
  · This decision is highly influenced by whether the firm being offered the special order is operating below
      or at capacity.
  · Qualitative factors would include consequences such as potential loss of current customers or
      displacement of jobs.

10.3 Evaluate and Determine Whether to Make or Buy a Component
  · Deciding to outsource a component of the operations or manufacturing of a business is a choice between
      alternatives.
  · Choosing whether to make or to buy a product, or choosing to have services performed by an outside
      company, are outsourcing decisions.
  · Outsourcing decisions involve comparing the cost to keep the product or service in-house to the cost of
      buying the product or service from an outside party.
  · An important consideration in these types of decisions is unavoidable costs.

10.4 Evaluate and Determine Whether to Keep or Discontinue a Segment or Product
  · Deciding to keep or discontinue a product line or a segment of a business is a choice between
      alternatives.
  · The choice to keep or eliminate involves comparing the business's total operating income generated from
      keeping the product or segment and comparing this to the business's total operating income generated if
      the product or segment is eliminated.
  · An important consideration in these types of decisions is allocated costs.

10.5 Evaluate and Determine Whether to Sell or Process Further
  · Deciding to do more work on a product to develop it into a new product is a choice between alternatives.
  · Choosing whether to sell a product as is or to process it further involves comparing the selling price
      without further processing (at split-off) to the net price (selling price less additional processing costs) that
      would be obtained if the product were processed further.
  · An important consideration in these types of decisions is the realization that the costs incurred up to the
      split-off point are irrelevant to the decision.

10.6 Evaluate and Determine How to Make Decisions When Resources Are Constrained
  · Deciding to how to use scare resources is a choice between alternatives.
  · Scarce resources can include anything that limits productive capacity, such as machine-hours or labor
      hours.
  · Choosing how to use the scarce resource involves determining the contribution margin for each product
      or service that uses the constrained resource. The products or services with the highest contribution
      margin have the largest impact on income.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making                                       543

· Choosing how to manage the scarce resource will help reduce bottlenecks.

     Multiple Choice

1. 10.1 ________ are the costs associated with not choosing the other alternative.
    A. Sunk costs
    B. Opportunity costs
    C. Differential costs
    D. Avoidable costs

2. 10.1 Which type of incurred costs are not relevant in decision-making (i.e., they have no bearing on
future events) and should be excluded in decision-making?

    A. avoidable costs
    B. unavoidable costs
    C. sunk costs
    D. differential costs

3. 10.1 The managerial decision-making process has which of the following as its third step?
    A. Review, analyze and evaluate the results of the decision.
    B. Decide, based upon the analysis, the best course of action.
    C. Identify alternative courses of action to achieve a goal or solve a problem.
    D. Perform a comprehensive differential (differential) analysis of potential solutions.

4. 10.1 Which of the following is not one of the five steps in decision-making process?
    A. identify alternatives
    B. review, analyze, and evaluate decision
    C. decide best action
    D. consult with CFO concerning variable costs

5. 10.2 Which of the following is sometimes referred to as the "Anti Chain Store Act"?
    A. Sarbanes-Oxley Act
    B. Robinson-Patman Act
    C. Wright-Patman Act
    D. Securities Act of 1939

6. 10.2 Jansen Crafters has the capacity to produce 50,000 oak shelves per year and is currently selling
44,000 shelves for $32 each. Cutrate Furniture approached Jansen about buying 1,200 shelves for bookcases it
is building and is willing to pay $26 for each shelf. No packaging will be required for the bulk order. Jansen
usually packages shelves for Home Depot at a price of $1.50 per shelf. The $1.50 per-shelf cost is included in
the unit variable cost of $27, with annual fixed costs of $320,000. However, the $1.50 packaging cost will not
apply in this case. The fixed costs will be unaffected by the special order and the company has the capacity to
accept the order. Based on this information, what would be the profit if Jansen accepts the special order?

    A. Profits will decrease by $1,200.
    B. Profits will increase by $31,200.
    C. Profits will increase by $600.
    D. Profits will increase by $7,200.
544                                                                               Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making

7. 10.3 ________ is the act of using another company to provide goods or services that your company
requires.

    A. Allocating
    B. Outsourcing
    C. Segmenting
    D. Leasing

8. 10.3 Which of the following is a disadvantage of outsourcing?
    A. freeing up capacity
    B. freeing up capital
    C. transferring production and technology risks
    D. limiting ability to upsize or downsize production

9. 10.3 Which of the following is not a qualitative decision that should be considered in an outsourcing
decision?

    A. employee morale
    B. product quality
    C. company reputation
    D. relevant costs

10. 10.4 Which of the following is one of the two approaches used to analyze data in the decision to keep or
discontinue a segment?

    A. comparing contribution margins and fixed costs
    B. comparing contribution margins and variable costs
    C. comparing gross margin and variable costs
    D. comparing total contribution margin under each alternative

11.     10.4 When should a segment be dropped?
    A.  only when the decrease in total contribution margin is less than the decrease in fixed cost
    B.  only when the decrease in total contribution margin is equal to fixed cost
    C.  only when the increase in total contribution margin is more than the decrease in fixed cost
    D.  only when the decrease in total contribution margin is less than the decrease in variable cost

12. 10.4 Youngstown Construction plans to discontinue its roofing segment. Last year, this segment
generated a contribution margin of $65,000 and incurred $70,000 in fixed costs. Discontinuing the segment will
allow the company to avoid half of the fixed costs. What effect is expected to occur to the company's overall
profit?

    A. a decrease of $5,000
    B. a decrease of $30,000
    C. a decrease of $5,000
    D. an increase of $30,000

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making                                                                     545

13. 10.5 Mallory's Video Supply has changed its focus tremendously and as a result has dropped the selling
price of DVD players from $45 to $38. Some units in the work-in-process inventory have costs of $30 per unit
associated with them, but Mallory can only sell these units in their current state for $22 each. Otherwise, it will
cost Mallory $11 per unit to rework these units so that they can be sold for $38 each. How much is the financial
impact if the units are processed further?

    A. $5 per unit profit
    B. $16 per unit profit
    C. $3 per unit loss
    D. $12 per unit loss

14. 10.6 A company produces two products, E and F, in batches of 100 units. The production and cost data
are:

The company can only perform 12,000 set-ups each period yet there is unlimited demand for each product.
What is the differential profit from producing product E instead of product F for the year?

    A. $216,000
    B. $204,000
    C. $12,000
    D. $54,000

15.     10.6 When operating in a constrained environment, which products should be produced?
    A.  products with the highest contribution margin per unit
    B.  products with the highest contribution margin per unit of the constrained process
    C.  products with the highest selling price
    D.  products with the lowest allocated joint cost

     Questions

1. 10.1 Your roommate at school believes that all fixed costs are always avoidable. Do you agree? How
would you explain your point of view to your roommate?

2. 10.1 Explain how to differentiate short-term decisions from long-term decisions of a business and the
changes in analyses that influence these decisions.
546                                                    Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making

3. 10.1 Felipe's Restaurant and Pie Shop needs help defining the costs for his business. He also wants to
know which costs are relevant or irrelevant to his decision. Identify each cost as relevant or irrelevant. Then
identify the type of cost (sunk, fixed, variable, or opportunity).

                          Cost            Relevant or  Sunk, Fixed, Variable, or
                                          Irrelevant?         Opportunity?
Rent
Baker wages
Felipe's culinary school tuition
Berries for pies
Painting dining area last year
Felipe's decision not to attend graduate
school

4. 10.2 What factors must any company consider before accepting a special-order contract?

5. 10.2 What are some of the qualitative issues that a special order can create?

6. 10.3 In "The Trouble with Outsourcing," a Schumpeter column in The Economist, there is a statement of
advice to companies, who outsource products or services: "they need to think harder about what is their core
business, and what is peripheral."[5] What types of problems do you think they are talking about? In your
answer, present at least five (5) problems that companies should consider when outsourcing products or
services.

7. 10.3 Many outsourced jobs have resulted in "offshoring" jobs, rather than using domestic outsourcing. If
a U.S. company wants to offshore a service like customer service, for example, what are some of their
considerations? In your answer, address offshoring disadvantages as compared with domestic outsourcing.

8. 10.4 What type of qualitative issues should management consider if a quantitative analysis reveals that a
segment should be dropped?

9. 10.4 In the decision by a grocery company that is trying to decide whether to keep or drop the bakery
department in its grocery stores, what would the bakery manager's salary be in relationship to the decision if
the manager will be laid off?

10. 10.5 What is of key importance for a company whose products can be processed further?

11. 10.5 What is a general rule to remember with respect to a sell-or-process-further environment, and
what costs are irrelevant to the decision?

5 "The Trouble with Outsourcing." The Economist. July 30, 2011. https://www.economist.com/business/2011/07/30/the-trouble-with-
outsourcing

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making  547

     Exercise Set A

EA1. 10.1 Garrison Boutique, a small novelty store, just spent $4,000 on a new software program that will
help in organizing its inventory. Due to the steep learning curve required to use the new software, Garrison
must decide between hiring two part-time college students or one full-time employee. Each college student
would work 20 hours per week, and would earn $15 per hour. The full-time employee would work 40 hours per
week and would earn $15 per hour plus the equivalent of $2 per hour in benefits. Employees are given two
polo shirts to wear as their uniform. The polo-shirts cost Garrison $10 each. What are the relevant costs,
relevant revenues, sunk costs, and opportunity costs for Garrison?

EA2. 10.1 Derek Dingler conducts corporate training seminars on managerial accounting techniques all
around the country. An upcoming training seminar is to be held in Philadelphia. Just prior to that engagement,
Derek will be in New York City. He plans to stay in Philadelphia the night of the seminar, as the next morning
he plans to meet with clients about future training seminar possibilities. One travel option is to fly from New
York to Philadelphia on the first flight on Friday morning, which will get him to Philadelphia two hours before
the start of his seminar. The cost of that flight is $287. Uber fees for his time in Philadelphia will cost $68. His
meal per diem is $40 for each full day and $25 for each half day. The hotel cost is $225 per night. His second
option is the rent a car and drive the two hours to Philadelphia from New York City the afternoon before the
seminar. The cost of the rental car including gas is $57 per day and the car will be needed for two full days. At
the end of the meetings he will return to New York City. What are the relevant costs, relevant revenues, sunk
costs, and opportunity costs that Derek Dingler has to consider in making the decision whether to fly or drive
from New York City to Philadelphia?

EA3. 10.1 Bridget Youhzi works for a large firm. Her alma mater has asked her to make a presentation to
the upcoming accounting honor society's annual scholarship dinner. Her firm supports the presentation
because it hopes to recruit more excellent employees like Bridget. The university is 196 miles from her office.
In order to get to the dinner by 5:00 p.m., she will need to leave work at 1:00 pm. She can drive her personal
car and be reimbursed $0.50 per mile. The dinner ends at 9:00 p.m. Company policy allows her to spend the
night if the return trip is four hours or more. There is a student-run inn and conference center across the
street from campus that charges $101 per night.

Instead of driving, she could catch a 3:00 p.m. flight that has a round-trip fare of $300. Flying would require her
to rent a car for $39 per day and pay an airport parking fee of $25 for the day. The company pays a per diem of
$35 for incidentals if the employee spends at least six hours out of town. (The per diem would be for one
24-hour period for either flying or driving.) As a manager, Bridget is responsible for recruiting within a budget
and wants to determine which is more economical.

Use the information provided to answer these questions.

    A. What is the total amount of expenses Bridget would include on her expense report if she drives?
    B. What is the total amount of expenses she would include on her expense report if she flies?
    C. What is the relevant cost of driving?
    D. What is the relevant cost of flying?
    E. What is the differential cost of flying over driving?
    F. What other factors should Bridget consider in her decision between driving and flying?
548                                                                               Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making

EA4. 10.2 Zena Technology sells arc computer printers for $55 per unit. Unit product costs are:

A special order to purchase 15,000 arc printers has recently been received from another company and Zena
has idle capacity to fill the order. Zena will incur an additional $2 per printer for additional labor costs due to a
slight modification the buyer wants made to the original product. One-third of the manufacturing overhead
costs is fixed and will be incurred no matter how many units are produced. When negotiating the price, what is
the minimum selling price that Zena should accept for this special order?
EA5. 10.2 Shelby Industries has a capacity to produce 45,000 oak shelves per year and is currently selling
40,000 shelves for $32 each. Martin Hardwoods has approached Shelby about buying 1,200 shelves for a new
project and is willing to pay $26 each. The shelves can be packaged in bulk; this saves Shelby $1.50 per shelf
compared to the normal packaging cost. Shelves have a unit variable cost of $27 with fixed costs of $350,000.
Because the shelves don't require packaging, the unit variable costs for the special order will drop from $27
per shelf to $25.50 per shelf. Shelby has enough idle capacity to accept the contract. What is the minimum
price per shelf that Shelby should accept for this special order?
EA6. 10.3 Reuben's Deli currently makes rolls for deli sandwiches it produces. It uses 30,000 rolls annually
in the production of deli sandwiches. The costs to make the rolls are:

A potential supplier has offered to sell Reuben the rolls for $0.90 each. If the rolls are purchased, 30% of the
fixed overhead could be avoided. If Reuben accepts the offer, what will the effect on profit be?
EA7. 10.3 Almond Treats manufactures various types of cereals that feature almonds. Acme Cereal
Company has approached Almond Treats with a proposal to sell the company its top selling cereal at a price of
$22,000 for 20,000 pounds. The costs shown are associated with production of 20,000 pounds of almond
cereal:

The manufacturing overhead consists of $2,000 of variable costs with the balance being allocated to fixed
costs. Should Almond Treats make or buy the almond cereal?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making  549

EA8. 10.4 Party Supply is trying to decide whether or not to continue its costume segment. The information
shown is available for Party Supply's business segments. Assume that neither the Direct fixed costs nor the
Allocated common fixed costs may be eliminated, but will be allocated to the two remaining segments.

If costumes are dropped, what change will occur to profit?
EA9. 10.5 Underground Food Store has 4,000 pounds of raw beef nearing its expiration date. Each pound
has a cost of $4.50. The beef could be sold "as is" for $3.00 per pound to the dog food processing plant, or
roasted and sold in the deli. The cost of roasting the beef will be $2.80 per pound, and each pound could be
sold for $6.50. What should be done with the beef, and why?
EA10. 10.5 Ralston Dairy gathered this data about the two products that it produces:

Which of the products should be processed further?
EA11. 10.6 Rough Stuff makes 2 products: khaki shorts and khaki pants for men. Each product passes
through the cutting machine area, which is the chief constraint during production. Khaki shorts take 15
minutes on the cutting machine and have a contribution margin per pair of shorts of $16. Khaki pants take 24
minutes on the cutting machine and have a contribution margin per pair of pants of $32. If it is assumed that
Rough Stuff has 4,800 hours available on the cutting machine to service a minimum demand for each product
of 3,000 units, how much will profits increase if 100 more hours of machine time can be obtained?
EA12. 10.6 Rough Stuff makes 2 products: khaki shorts and khaki pants for men. Each product passes
through the cutting machine area, which is the chief constraint during production. Khaki shorts take 15
minutes on the cutting machine and have a contribution margin per pair of shorts of $16. Khaki pants take 24
minutes on the cutting machine and have a contribution margin per pair of pants of $32. If it is assumed that
Rough Stuff has 4,800 hours available on the cutting machine to service a minimum demand for each product
of 3,000 units, how many of each product should be made?
550                                                                               Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making

  B Exercise Set B

EB1. 10.1 Ella Maksimov is CEO of her own marketing firm. The firm recently moved from a strip mall in the
suburbs to an office space in a downtown building, in order to make the firm's employees more accessible to
clients. Two new clients are interested in using Ella's advertising services but both clients are in the same line
of business, meaning that Ella's company can represent only one of the clients. Pampered Pooches wants to
hire Ella's firm for a one-year contract for web, newspaper, radio, and direct mail advertising. Pampered will
pay $126,000 for these services. Ella estimates the cost of the services requested by Pampered Pooches to be
$83,000. Delightful Dogs is interested in hiring Ella to produce mass mailings and web ads. Delightful will pay
Ella $94,000 for these services and Ella estimates the cost of these services to be $47,000. Identify any relevant
costs, relevant revenues, sunk costs, and opportunity costs that Ella Graham has to consider in making the
decision whether to represent Pampered Pooches or Delightful Dogs.

EB2. 10.1 You are trying to decide whether to take a job after you graduate or go onto graduate school.
Consider the following questions as you make your decision.

    A. Which of these costs, for the most part, would be relevant (R), and which would be irrelevant (IR)?
                  Cost of your undergraduate education
                  Salary with an undergraduate degree
                  Salary with both an undergraduate degree and a graduate degree
                  Rent
                  Car Insurance
                  Graduate school tuition and fees
                  Food costs
                  Moving expenses

    B. Which of these costs could have a differential amount that is relevant/irrelevant, depending upon the
          location and or policies of your new job?

EB3. 10.1 You are working for a large firm that has asked you to attend a career fair at a university that is
185 miles from your office. You need to be there at 9:00 a.m. on a Monday morning. You can drive your
personal car and be reimbursed $0.55 per mile, but you would need to leave home at 5:30 a.m. to get to the
event and set up on time. Company policy allows you to spend the night if you must leave town before 6:00
a.m. The hotel across the street from campus charges $85 per night. Instead of driving, you could catch a 7:00
a.m. flight with a round-trip fare of $260. Flying would require you to rent a car for $29 per day, and you would
have an airport parking fee of $20 for the day. The company pays a per diem of $40 for incidentals if you spend
at least 6 hours out of town. (The per diem would be for one 24-hour period for either flying or driving.) As a
manager, you are responsible for recruiting within a budget and want to determine which is more
economical.

Use the information provided to answer these questions.

    A. What is the total amount of expenses you would include on your expense report if you drive?
    B. What is the total amount of expenses you would include on your expense report if you fly?
    C. What is the relevant cost of driving?
    D. What is the relevant cost of flying?
    E. What is the differential cost of flying over driving?
    F. What other factors should you consider in your decision between driving and flying?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making  551

EB4. 10.2 Dimitri Designs has capacity to produce 30,000 desk chairs per year and is currently selling all
30,000 for $240 each. Country Enterprises has approached Dimitri to buy 800 chairs for $210 each. Dimitri's
normal variable cost is $165 per chair, including $50 per unit in direct labor per chair. Dimitri can produce the
special order on an overtime shift, which means that direct labor would be paid overtime at 150% of the
normal pay rate. The annual fixed costs will be unaffected by the special order and the contract will not disrupt
any of Dimitri's other operations. What will be the impact on profits of accepting the order?

EB5. 10.2 Aspen Enterprises makes award pins for various events. Budget information regarding the
current period is:

A fraternity with which Aspen has a long relationship approached Aspen with a special order for 6,000 pins at a
price of $2.75 per pin. Variable costs will be the same as the current production, and the special order will not
impact the rest of the company's orders. However, Aspen is operating at capacity and will incur an additional
$5,000 in fixed manufacturing overhead if the order is accepted. Based on this information, what is the
differential income (loss) associated with accepting the special order?
EB6. 10.3 Country Diner currently makes cookies for its boxed lunches. It uses 40,000 cookies annually in
the production of the boxed lunches. The costs to make the cookies are:

A potential supplier has offered to sell Country Diner the cookies for $0.85 each. If the cookies are purchased,
10% of the fixed overhead could be avoided. If Jason accepts the offer, what will the effect on profit be?
EB7. 10.3 Oat Treats manufactures various types of cereal bars featuring oats. Simmons Cereal Company
has approached Oat Treats with a proposal to sell the company its top selling oat cereal bar at a price of
$27,500 for 20,000 bars. The costs shown are associated with production of 20,000 oat bars currently.

The manufacturing overhead consists of $3,000 of variable costs with the balance being allocated to fixed
costs. Should Oat Treats make or buy the oat bars?
552                                                                               Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making

EB8. 10.4 The Party Zone is trying to decide whether or not to continue its costume segment. The
information shown is available for Party Supply's business segments. Assume that neither the Direct fixed
costs nor the Allocated common fixed costs may be eliminated, but will be allocated to the two remaining
segments.

If costumes are dropped, what change will occur to profit?
EB9. 10.5 Beretti's Food Mart has 6,000 pounds of raw pork nearing its expiration date. Each pound has a
cost of $5.50. The pork could be sold "as is" for $2.50 per pound to the dog food processing plant, or it could
be made into custom Italian sausage and sold in the meat department. The cost of the sausage making is
$3.00 per pound and each pound could be sold for $7.50. What should be done with the pork and why?
EB10. 10.5 Balcom Dairy gathered this data about the two products that it produces:

Which of the products should be processed further?
EB11. 10.6 Power Corp. makes 2 products: blades for table saws and blades for handsaws. Each product
passes through the sharpening machine area, which is the chief constraint during production. Handsaw
blades take 15 minutes on the sharpening machine and have a contribution margin per blade of $15. Table
saw blades take 20 minutes on the sharpening machine and have a contribution margin per blade of $35. If it
is assumed that Power Corp. has 5,000 hours available on the sharpening machine to service a minimum
demand for each product of 4,000 units, how much will profits increase if 200 more hours of machine time can
be obtained?
EB12. 10.6 Power Corp. makes 2 products: blades for table saws and blades for handsaws. Each product
passes through the sharpening machine area, which is the chief constraint during production. Handsaw
blades take 15 minutes on the sharpening machine and have a contribution margin per blade of $15. Table
saw blades take 20 minutes on the sharpening machine and have a contribution margin per blade of $35. If it
is assumed that Power Corp. has 5,000 hours available on the sharpening machine to service a minimum
demand for each product of 4,000 units, how many of each product should be made?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making  553

     Problem Set A

PA1. 10.1 Artisan Metalworks has a bottleneck in their production that occurs within the engraving
department. Jamal Moore, the COO, is considering hiring an extra worker, whose salary will be $55,000 per
year, to solve the problem. With this extra worker, the company could produce and sell 3,000 more units per
year. Currently, the selling price per unit is $25 and the cost per unit is $7.85. Using the information provided,
calculate the annual financial impact of hiring the extra worker.

PA2. 10.1 Syntech makes digital cameras for drones. Their basic digital camera uses $80 in variable costs
and requires $1,500 per month in fixed costs. Syntech sells 100 cameras per month. If they process the camera
further to enhance its functionality, it will require an additional $45 per unit of variable costs, plus an increase
in fixed costs of $1,000 per month. The current price of the camera is $160. The marketing manager is positive
that they can sell more and charge a higher price for the improved version. At what price level would the
upgraded camera begin to improve operational earnings?
PA3. 10.2 Marcotti Cupcakes bakes and sells a basic cupcake for $1.25. The cost of producing 600,000
cupcakes in the prior year was:

At the start of the current year, Marcotti received a special order for 15,000 cupcakes to be sold for $1.10 per
cupcake. To complete the order, the company must incur an additional $700 in total fixed costs to lease a
special machine that will stamp the cupcakes with the customer's logo. This order will not affect any of
Marcotti's other operations and it has excess capacity to fulfill the contract. Should the company accept the
special order? (Show your work.)
554                                                                               Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making

PA4. 10.2 Ken Owens Construction specializes in small additions and repairs. His normal charge is $400/day
plus materials. Due to his physical condition, David, an elderly gentleman, needs a downstairs room converted
to a bathroom. Ken has produced a bid for $5000 to complete the bathroom. He did not provide David with the
details of the bid. However, they are shown here.

     A. The town's social services has asked Ken if he could reduce his bid to $4000. Should Ken accept the
           counter offer?

     B. How much would his income be reduced?
     C. If the town's social services guaranteed him another job next month at his normal price, could he

           accept this job at $4000?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making                                                                    555

PA5. 10.3 Boston Executive, Inc., produces executive limousines and currently manufactures the mini-bar
inset at these costs:

The company received an offer from Elite Mini-Bars to produce the insets for $2,100 per unit and supply 1,000
mini-bars for the coming year's estimated production. If the company accepts this offer and shuts down
production of this part of the business, production workers and supervisors will be reassigned to other areas.
Assume that for the short-term decision-making process demonstrated in this problem, the company's total
labor costs (direct labor and supervisor salaries) will remain the same if the bar inserts are purchased.
The specialized equipment cannot be used and has no market value. However, the space occupied by the mini-
bar production can be used by a different production group that will lease it for $55,000 per year. Should the
company make or buy the mini-bar insert?

PA6. 10.3 Gent Designs requires three units of part A for every unit of A1 that it produces. Currently, part A
is made by Gent, with these per-unit costs in a month when 4,000 units were produced:

Variable manufacturing overhead is applied at $1.00 per unit. The other $0.30 of overhead consists of allocated
fixed costs. Gent will need 6,000 units of part A for the next year's production.
Cory Corporation has offered to supply 6,000 units of part A at a price of $7.00 per unit. If Gent accepts the
offer, all of the variable costs and $1,200 of the fixed costs will be avoided. Should Gent Designs accept the
offer from Cory Corporation?

PA7. 10.4 Trifecta Distributors has decided to discontinue manufacturing its X Plus model. Currently, the
company has 4,600 partially completed X Plus models on hand. The government has put a recall on a particular
part in the X Plus model, so each base model must now be reworked to accommodate the style of the new
part. The company has spent $110 per unit to manufacture these X Plus models to their current state.
Reworking each X Plus model will cost $20 for materials and $20 for direct labor. In addition, $7 of variable
overhead and $32 of allocated fixed overhead (relating primarily to depreciation of plant and equipment) will
be allocated per unit. If Trifecta completes the X Plus models, it can sell them for $160 per unit. On the other
hand, another manufacturer is interested in purchasing the partially completed units for $104 each and
converting them into Z Plus models. Prepare a differential analysis per unit to determine if Trifecta should
complete the X Plus models or sell them in their current state.
556  Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making

PA8. 10.4 Extreme Sports sells logo sports merchandise. The company is contemplating whether or not to
continue its custom embroidery service. All of the company's direct fixed costs can be avoided if a segment is
dropped. This information is available for the segments.

    A. What will be the impact on net income if the embroidery segment is dropped?
    B. Assume that if the embroidery segment is dropped, apparel sales will increase 10%. What is the impact

          on the contribution margin and net income solely for the apparel?
    C. Identify one cost that is not relevant in this analysis.
PA9. 10.4 Hong Publishing has purchased Lang Publishing. After reviewing titles from both companies, a
decision must be made to determine what titles must be dropped. The following information is available to
make the decision.

    A. What is the total income if all titles were produced?
    B. If Title X was dropped, what would be the effect on Net Income?
    C. How much did Title X Contribute to Fixed Costs?
    D. Determine the cost and the amount that will remain even if Title X is dropped?
    E. Which costs and amount will be eliminated if Title X is dropped?
PA10. 10.5 Calcion Industries produces two joint products, Y and Z. Prior to the split-off point, the company
incurred costs of $36,000. Product Y weighs 25 pounds and product Z weighs 75 pounds. Product Y sells for
$150 per pound and product Z sells for $125 per pound. Based on a physical measure of output, allocate joint
costs to products Y and Z.
PA11. 10.5 Quality Clothing, Inc., produces skorts and jumper uniforms for school children. In the process
of cutting out the cloth pieces for each product, a certain amount of scrap cloth is produced. Quality has been
selling this cloth scrap to Jorge's Scrap Warehouse for $3.25 per pound. Last year, the company sold 40,000 lb.
of scrap, which would be enough to make 10,000 teddy bears that the management of Quality is now
interested in producing. Their processes would need some reprogramming, particularly in the cutting and
stitching processes, but it would require no additional worker training. However, new packaging would be
needed. The total variable cost to produce the teddy bears $3.85. Fixed costs would increase by $95,000 per
year for the lease of the packaging equipment and Quality estimates it could produce and sell 10,000 teddy
bears per year. Finished teddy bears could be sold for $18.00 each. Should Quality continue to sell the scrap
cloth or should Quality process the scrap into teddy bears to sell?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making                                                                         557

PA12. 10.6 At Gems in the Rough, a jewelry company, the engraving department is a bottleneck. The
company is considering hiring an extra worker, whose salary will be $56,000 per year, to ease the problem.
Using the extra worker, the company will be able to engrave 8,000 more units per year. The selling price per
unit is $16. The cost per unit currently is $11.85 as shown:

What is the annual financial impact of hiring the extra worker for the bottleneck process?

PA13. 10.6 Sports Specialists makes baseballs and softballs in a three-step process. Unfortunately, the
sewing machine process has been identified as a bottleneck. Each softball has a contribution margin of $6.00
and each baseball has a contribution margin of $2.00. The sewing machine can make 10 softballs or 25
baseballs in one hour.

    A. If demand for both products is unlimited and the sewing machine capacity cannot be expanded, which
          product should be produced?

    B. If demand for each ball is limited to 6,000 balls and there are 800 hours available on the machine, how
          many of each product should be produced?

  B Problem Set B

PB1. 10.1 Variety Artisans has a bottleneck in their production that occurs within the engraving
department. Arjun Naipul, the COO, is considering hiring an extra worker, whose salary will be $45,000 per
year, to solve the problem. With this extra worker, the company could produce and sell 3,500 more units per
year. Currently, the selling price per unit is $18 and the cost per unit is $5.85. Using the information provided,
calculate the annual financial impact of hiring the extra worker.

PB2. 10.1 Mortech makes digital cameras for drones. Their basic digital camera uses $80 in variable costs
and requires $1,500 per month in fixed costs. Mortech sells 200 cameras per month. If they process the camera
further to enhance its functionality, it will require an additional $45 per unit of variable costs, plus an increase
in fixed costs of $1,000 per month. The current price of the camera is $200. The marketing manager is positive
that they can sell more and charge a higher price for the improved version. At what price level would the
upgraded camera begin to improve operational earnings?
558                                                                               Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making

PB3. 10.2 Cinnamon Depot bakes and sells cinnamon rolls for $1.75 each. The cost of producing 500,000
rolls in the prior year was:

At the start of the current year, Cinnamon Depot received a special order for 18,000 rolls to be sold for $1.50
per roll. The company estimates it will incur an additional $1,000 in total fixed costs in order to lease a special
machine that forms the rolls in the shape of a heart per the customer's request. This order will not affect any
of its other operations. Should the company accept the special order? (Show your work.)

PB4. 10.2 Myrna White is a mobile housekeeper. The price for a standard house cleaning is $150 and takes
5 hours. Each worker is paid $25/hour, uses $15 of materials and $0.50 per mile to use their own vehicle to
travel from job to job. The average job is 5 miles. Arniz Meyroyan has a family reunion at her house and needs
her house freshened up. She offers $75 for this emergency tidy-up service. This service includes vacuuming
and cleaning floors, dusting, and cleaning the bathrooms. Only $5 of materials would be used.

    A. Prepare an Excel spread sheet to determine the differential income if the emergency tidy-up service is
          priced at $75. The tidy-up service will take 2 hours.

    B. If a $25 surcharge was included to make the price of $100 how would the differential income change?
    C. If the hourly worker rate increased to $30/hour, how would net income change?
    D. What other issue would you need to consider?

PB5. 10.2 Blake Cohen Painting Service specializes in small paint jobs. His normal charge is $350/day plus
materials. Moesha needs her basement painted. Blake has produced a bid for $1500 to complete the
basement painting. Blake completed a cost estimate for his service as shown.

     A. Moesha mentions that she can't pay the $1500. She is a widow and you feel an obligation to take care
           of widows but can't lose money. How much would you charge and still be able to make a profit?

     B. Moesha has asked you to paint the rest of her house. Could you continue to give her the same deal?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making                                                                  559

PB6. 10.3 Regal Executive, Inc., produces executive motor coaches and currently manufactures the tent
awnings that accompany them at these costs:

The company received an offer from Saied Tents to produce the awnings for $3,200 per unit and supply 1,000
awnings for the coming year's estimated production. If the company accepts this offer and shuts down
production of this part of the business, production workers and supervisors will be reassigned to other areas.
Assume that for the short-term decision-making process demonstrated in this problem, the company's total
labor costs (direct labor and supervisor salaries) will remain the same if the bar inserts are purchased.
The specialized equipment cannot be used and has no market value. However, the space occupied by the
awning production can be used by a different production group that will lease it for $60,000 per year. Should
the company make or buy the awnings?
PB7. 10.3 Remarkable Enterprises requires four units of part A for every unit of A1 that it produces.
Currently, part A is made by Remarkable, with these per-unit costs in a month when 4,000 units were
produced:

Variable manufacturing overhead is applied at $1.60 per unit. The other $0.50 of overhead consists of allocated
fixed costs. Remarkable will need 8,000 units of part A for the next year's production.
Altoona Corporation has offered to supply 8,000 units of part A at a price of $8.00 per unit. If Remarkable
accepts the offer, all of the variable costs and $2,000 of the fixed costs will be avoided. Should Remarkable
accept the offer from Altoona Corporation?
560                                                                               Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making

PB8. 10.3 Colin O'Shea has a carpentry shop that employs 4 carpenters. Colin received an order for 1,000
coffee tables. The coffee tables have a round table top and four decorative legs. An offer for $500 per table
was received. Colin found an unfinished round table top that he could buy for $50 each.

    A. Using this quantitative cost data to make the table top, should Colin buy the table top or make it?

    B. What qualitative factors would be included in your decision.

B. Can the vendor make it to the same quality standards? Can it be completed on time? Is there idle capacity in
the factory that could be used?

PB9. 10.4 ZZOOM, Inc., has decided to discontinue manufacturing its Z Best model. Currently, the company
has 4,600 partially completed Z Best models on hand. The government has put a recall on a particular part in
the Z Best model, so each base model must now be reworked to accommodate the style of the new part. The
company has spent $110 per unit to manufacture these Z Best models to their current state. Reworking each Z
Best model will cost $22 for materials and $25 for direct labor. In addition, $9 of variable overhead and $34 of
allocated fixed overhead (relating primarily to depreciation of plant and equipment) will be allocated per unit.
If ZZOOM completes the Z Best models, it can sell them for $180 per unit. On the other hand, another
manufacturer is interested in purchasing the partially completed units for $105 each and converting them into
Z Plus models. Prepare a differential analysis per unit to determine if ZZOOM should complete the Z Best
models or sell them in their current state.

PB10. 10.4 Cable paper company produces many colors of paper. The current popular color is grey. To
increase the production of grey paper, a decision must be made to determine what color must be dropped.
The following information is available to make the decision.

     A. What is the total income if all colors were produced?
     B. If Peach was dropped, what would be the effect on Net Income?
     C. How much did Peach paper contribute to Fixed Costs?
     D. Determine the cost and the amount that will remain even if Peach is dropped?
     E. Which costs and amount will be eliminated if Peach is dropped?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making                            561

PB11. 10.5 Strawberry Sweet Company makes a variety of jams and jellies. During June, 55,000 gallons of
strawberry mash was processed at a joint cost of $40,000. This produced 42,000 gallons of preserve-grade mix
and 4,000 gallons of strawberry juice for jelly. The juice could be processed further into energy drinks, and the
preserve mix could be processed further into ice cream flavoring. Information on these items is shown:

    A. Assume that the joint cost is allocated to the products based on the physical quantity of output of each
          product. How much joint cost should be assigned to each product?

    B. How much joint cost should be assigned to each product if the relative sales value allocation method is
          used?

    C. Which products should be processed further?

PB12. 10.5 Laramie Industries produces two joint products, H and C. Prior to the split-off point, the
company incurred costs of $66,000. Product H weighs 44 pounds and product C weighs 66 pounds. Product H
sells for $250 per pound and product C sells for $295 per pound.

Based on a physical measure of output, allocate joint costs to products H and C.

PB13. 10.5 Jamboree Outfitters, Inc., produces pocket knives and fillet knives for outdoor sporting. In the
process of making the knives, some irregularities occur and no further work is performed on the blades.
Jamboree has been selling these irregular blades to scrap dealers for $5.00 per pound. Last year, the company
sold 50,000 lbs. of scrap. The company found that Amazon will buy the irregular knives for $12 each provided
Jamboree finishes producing the knives into sellable form and also assuming there are enough irregular
blades to make 50,000 completed knives. Jamboree's processes would not need reprogramming, particularly
in the shaping and sharpening processes. However, this would require one additional worker, and new
packaging would be needed. The total variable cost to produce the irregulars is $4.85. Fixed costs would
increase by $175,000 per year for the lease of the packaging equipment and the new worker. Jamboree
estimates it could produce and sell 50,000 knives per year. Should Jamboree continue to sell the scrap blades
or should Jamboree process the irregulars to sell to Amazon?

PB14. 10.5 Daisy Hernandez sells girls christening dresses through the online store, Etsy. Her customers
have asked if she has necklaces that could be included with the dress. Daisy found white glossy ceramic hearts
from another Etsy vendor for $20. Daisy has the talent and already has a fully depreciated kiln to make these
hearts.

    A. Using the provided quantitative cost data to make the heart, should Daisy buy from her fellow Etsy
          vendor or make it herself?

B. What qualitative factors would be included in your decision.
562                                                                               Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making

PB15. 10.5 Dr. Detail is a mobile car wash. The price for a standard wash is $35 and takes half an hour. Each
worker is paid $20/hr, uses $5 of materials and $0.50 per mile to use their own vehicle to travel from job to job.
The average job is 5 miles.

Ernest Kuhn's son got sick in the car, and Ernest Kuhn has asked Dr. Detail to detail his car instead of doing a
simple wash and vacuum.

    A. Determine the differential income if $100 was charged to detail the car. Each car detail will take 2
          hours. The materials used by the worker is three times that of a standard car wash.

    B. If the price is raised to $150, what is the differential income change?
    C. Keeping the price at $150, if the worker rate per hour would increase to $20/hr how would the

          differential income change? Prepare an Excel spreadsheet.
    D. What other issues would you need to consider?

PB16. 10.6 At Stardust Gems, a faux gem and jewelry company, the setting department is a bottleneck. The
company is considering hiring an extra worker, whose salary will be $67,000 per year, to ease the problem.
Using the extra worker, the company will be able to produce and sell 9,000 more units per year. The selling
price per unit is $20. The cost per unit currently is $15.85 as shown:

What is the annual financial impact of hiring the extra worker for the bottleneck process?

PB17. 10.6 Sports Buffs makes basketballs and footballs in a three-step process. Unfortunately, the stem
insertion process has been identified as a bottleneck. Each basketball has a contribution margin of $15.00 and
each football has a contribution margin of $4.00. The stem insertion equipment can make 10 basketballs or 30
footballs in one hour.

    A. If demand for both products is unlimited and the stem insertion machine capacity cannot be
          expanded, which product should be produced?

    B. If demand for each ball is limited to 9,000 balls and there are 4,000 hours available on the machine,
          how many of each product should be produced?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making                                                                                563

     Thought Provokers

TP1. 10.2 Seda Sarkisian makes wedding cakes from her home. A customer has requested two duplicate
wedding cakes: one for the wedding and one to be frozen for their anniversary. The couple has offered $400
for both cakes instead of $500 ($250 each). The cost information to make one cake is shown.

    A. What is the cost for the first cake?
    B. What cost would not be included in the second cake?
    C. What is the cost of the second cake?
    D. What would be the total cost of this order if the offer was accepted?
    E. How much profit will Seda be recording for this special order?
    F. If your company policy is to always have a 15% profit on all order, would you still accept this order?
    G. If you would not accept the order, what price would you negotiate?

TP2. 10.3 You are a management accountant for Time Treasures Company, whose company has recently
signed an outsourcing agreement with Spotless, Inc., a janitorial service company. Spotless will provide all of
Time Treasures' janitorial services, including sweeping floors, hauling trash, washing windows, stocking
restrooms, and performing minor repairs. Time Treasures will be billed at an hourly rate based on the type of
service performed. The work of common laborers (sweeping, hauling trash) is to be billed at $8 per hour. More
skilled (repairs) and more dangerous work (washing outside windows on the 23rd floor) are to be billed at $18
per hour. Supervisory time is to be billed at $20 per hour. Spotless will submit monthly invoices, which will
show the number and types of hours for which Time Treasures is being charged. The outsourcing contract is
simple and straightforward.

    A. What are some of the internal control problems you foresee as a result of outsourcing the janitorial
          service with this contract?

    B. Explain recommendations to control risk that would you suggest after reviewing the contract.

TP3. 10.5 Brindi's Babysitting Center currently rents a 1200 sq foot facility for her 20-child facility. Her
business has gotten five stars on Yelp, which has prompted more applications. She has to make a decision
between expanding her operations to an 1,800 sq foot facility or staying in the current facility. Shown is the
cost data of the options:

What is the differential cost of the two alternatives: A) move to a larger facility or B) stay in current facility?
564                                                                               Chapter 10 Short-Term Decision Making

TP4. 10.6 Akimoto's Bicycle Co assembles three types of bicycles: Charger, Sublime, Kidde. Due to their
residential location they operate with one 8 hour shift, 5 days per week, 50 weeks a year. Balancing the bikes is
the bottleneck. The information about production time and costs for these three bicycles are:

     A. How many of each bicycle should be produced to maximize profits?
     B. What qualitative factors would you need to consider?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
    11

              Capital Budgeting Decisions

Figure 11.1 Milling Manufacturing. Long-term project investment requires careful capital budgeting analysis.
(credit: modification of "Parts for CNC Machine" by Andy Malmin/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

 Chapter Outline

  11.1 Describe Capital Investment Decisions and How They Are Applied
  11.2 Evaluate the Payback and Accounting Rate of Return in Capital Investment Decisions
  11.3 Explain the Time Value of Money and Calculate Present and Future Values of Lump Sums and

       Annuities
  11.4 Use Discounted Cash Flow Models to Make Capital Investment Decisions
  11.5 Compare and Contrast Non-Time Value-Based Methods and Time Value-Based Methods in Capital

       Investment Decisions

      Why It Matters

   Jerry Price owns Milling Manufacturing, a production facility geared toward entrepreneurial product
   development. Initially, Jerry purchased several milling machines, but after seven years, the machines have
   become obsolete due to technological advances. Jerry must purchase new machines to continue business
   growth, and there are several options available. How does he choose the best machines for his business? What
   factors must he consider before purchase?
   Jerry must consider several important factors--both financial and non-financial--as he makes this decision.
   First, he needs to consider the commitment of his initial capital investment. He also needs to compare
   differences between options such as warranties, the production capacities of different machines, and
   maintenance and repair costs. Another factor is the useful life of the new equipment--in other words, both its
   physical and the technological life. He will also consider how long it will take to recoup the cost of the
   investment, the impact on cash flow, and how the passage of time affects the value of the asset to the
566                                                                               Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions

organization--it's monetary value that considered depreciation to determine what the asset is actually worth
to the organization in terms of dollars (i.e., "what could we sell it for?"). Jerry will consider the value of the
dollar invested today in purchasing the machine as opposed to the value of the dollar in the future that might
be better spent on another project. This last factor is significant because the new equipment will probably
provide part of his down payment on future replacement equipment. There are also nonfinancial factors to
consider, such as changes to customer satisfaction and employee morale.

Jerry knows this equipment choice goes well beyond color or price preferences. The decision has a long-lasting
influence on company direction and opportunity, and he needs to utilize capital budgeting analysis to help him
make this decision.

 11.1 Describe Capital Investment Decisions and How They Are Applied

Assume that you own a small printing store that provides custom printing applications for general business
use. Your printers are used daily, which is good for business but results in heavy wear on each printer. After
some time, and after a few too many repairs, you consider whether it is best to continue to use the printers
you have or to invest some of your money in a new set of printers. A capital investment decision like this one is
not an easy one to make, but it is a common occurrence faced by companies every day. Companies will use a
step-by-step process to determine their capital needs, assess their ability to invest in a capital project, and
decide which capital expenditures are the best use of their resources.

Fundamentals of Capital Investment Decisions

Capital investment (sometimes also referred to as capital budgeting) is a company's contribution of funds
toward the acquisition of long-lived (long-term or capital) assets for further growth. Long-term assets can
include investments such as the purchase of new equipment, the replacement of old machinery, the expansion
of operations into new facilities, or even the expansion into new products or markets. These capital
expenditures are different from operating expenses. An operating expense is a regularly-occurring expense
used to maintain the current operations of the company, but a capital expenditure is one used to grow the
business and produce a future economic benefit.

Capital investment decisions occur on a frequent basis, and it is important for a company to determine its
project needs to establish a path for business development. This decision is not as obvious or as simple as it
may seem. There is a lot at stake with a large outlay of capital, and the long-term financial impact may be
unknown due to the capital outlay decreasing or increasing over time. To help reduce the risk involved in
capital investment, a process is required to thoughtfully select the best opportunity for the company.

The process for capital decision-making involves several steps:

 1. Determine capital needs for both new and existing projects.
 2. Identify and establish resource limitations.
 3. Establish baseline criteria for alternatives.
 4. Evaluate alternatives using screening and preference decisions.
 5. Make the decision.

The company must first determine its needs by deciding what capital improvements require immediate
attention. For example, the company may determine that certain machinery requires replacement before any
new buildings are acquired for expansion. Or, the company may determine that the new machinery and
building expansion both require immediate attention. This latter situation would require a company to

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions                                                                                                     567

consider how to choose which investment to pursue first, or whether to pursue both capital investments
concurrently.

   CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

   Brexit

   The decision to invest money in capital expenditures may not only be impacted by internal company
   objectives, but also by external factors. In 2016, Great Britain voted to leave the European Union (EU)
   (termed "Brexit"), which separates their trade interests and single-market economy from other
   participating European nations. This has led to uncertainty for United Kingdom (UK) businesses.
   Because of this instability, capital spending slowed or remained stagnant immediately following the
   Brexit vote and has not yet recovered growth momentum.[1] The largest decrease in capital spending has
   occurred in the expansions of businesses into new markets. The UK is expected to separate from the EU
   in 2019.

The second step, exploring resource limitations, evaluates the company's ability to invest in capital
expenditures given the availability of funds and time. Sometimes a company may have enough resources to
cover capital investments in many projects. Many times, however, they only have enough resources to invest in
a limited number of opportunities. If this is the situation, the company must evaluate both the time and
money needed to acquire each asset. Time allocation considerations can include employee commitments and
project set-up requirements. Fund limitations may result from a lack of capital fundraising, tied-up capital in
non-liquid assets, or extensive up-front acquisition costs that extend beyond investment means (Table 11.1).
Once the ability to invest has been established, the company needs to establish baseline criteria for
alternatives.

                                        Resource Limitations

Time Considerations                                           Money Considerations

· Employee commitments                                        · Lack of liquidity
· Project set-up                                              · Tied up in non-liquid assets
· Time-frame necessary to secure financing                    · Up-front acquisition costs

Table 11.1 When resources are limited, capital budgeting procedures are needed.

Alternatives are the options available for investment. For example, if a company needs to purchase new
printing equipment, all possible printing equipment options are considered alternatives. Since there are so
many alternative possibilities, a company will need to establish baseline criteria for the investment. Baseline
criteria are measurement methods that can help differentiate among alternatives. Common measurement
methods include the payback method, accounting rate of return, net present value, or internal rate of return.

1 G. Jackson "UK Business Investment Stalls in Year since Brexit Vote." The Financial Times. August 24, 2017. https://www.ft.com/content/
daff3ffe-88ac-11e7-8bb1-5ba57d47eff7
568  Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions

These methods have varying degrees of complexity and will be discussed in greater detail in Evaluate the
Payback and Accounting Rate of Return in Capital Investment Decisions and Explain the Time Value of Money
and Calculate Present and Future Values of Lump Sums and Annuities

To evaluate alternatives, businesses will use the measurement methods to compare outcomes. The outcomes
will not only be compared against other alternatives, but also against a predetermined rate of return on the
investment (or minimum expectation) established for each project consideration. The rate of return concept is
discussed in more detail in Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures. A company may use
experience or industry standards to predetermine factors used to evaluate alternatives. Alternatives will first
be evaluated against the predetermined criteria for that investment opportunity, in a screening decision. The
screening decision allows companies to remove alternatives that would be less desirable to pursue given
their inability to meet basic standards. For example, if there were three different printing equipment options
and a minimum return had been established, any printers that did not meet that minimum return requirement
would be removed from consideration.

If one or more of the alternatives meets or exceeds the minimum expectations, a preference decision is
considered. A preference decision compares potential projects that meet screening decision criteria and will
rank the alternatives in order of importance, feasibility, or desirability to differentiate among alternatives.
Once the company determines the rank order, it is able to make a decision on the best avenue to pursue
(Figure 11.2). When making the final decision, all financial and non-financial factors are deliberated.

Figure 11.2 Select Between Alternatives. Screening and preference decisions can narrow alternatives in
making a selection. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

   ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

   Volkswagen Diesel Emissions Scandal

   Sometimes a company makes capital decisions due to outside pressures or unforeseen circumstances.
   The New York Times reported in 2015 that the car company Volkswagen was "scarred by an emissions-
   cheating scandal," and "would need to cut its budget next year for new technology and research--a
   reversal after years of increased spending aimed at becoming the world's biggest carmaker."[2] This was
   a huge setback for Volkswagen, not only because the company had budgeted and planned to become
   the largest car company in the world, but also because the scandal damaged its reputation and set it
   back financially.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions  569

   Volkswagen "set aside about 9 billion euros ($9.6 billion) to cover costs related to making the cars
   compliant with pollution regulations;" however, the sums were "unlikely to cover the costs of potential
   legal judgments or other fines."[3] All of the costs related to the company's unethical actions needed to
   be included in the capital budget, as company resources were limited. Volkswagen used capital
   budgeting procedures to allocate funds for buying back the improperly manufactured cars and paying
   any legal claims or penalties. Other companies might take other approaches, but an unethical action that
   results in lawsuits and fines often requires an adjustment to the capital decision-making process.

Let's broadly consider what the five-step process for capital decision-making looks like for Melanie's Sewing
Studio. Melanie owns a sewing studio that produces fabric patterns for wholesale.

 1. Determine capital needs for both new and existing projects.
      Upon review of her future needs, Melanie determines that her five-year-old commercial sewing machine
      could be replaced. The old machine is still working, but production has slowed in recent months with an
      increase in repair needs and replacement parts. Melanie expects a new sewing machine to make her
      production process more efficient, which could also increase her current business volume. She decides to
      explore the possibility of purchasing a new sewing machine.

 2. Identify and establish resource limitations.
      Melanie must consider if she has enough time and money to invest in a new sewing machine. The Sewing
      Studio has been in business for three years and has shown steady financial growth year over year.
      Melanie expects to make enough profit to afford a capital investment of $50,000. If she does purchase a
      new sewing machine, she will have to train her staff on how to use the machine and will have to cease
      production while the new machine is installed. She anticipates a loss of $20,000 for training and
      production time. The estimation of the $20,000 loss is based on the downtime in production for both labor
      and product output.

 3. Establish baseline criteria for alternatives.
      Melanie is considering two different sewing machines for purchase. Before she evaluates which option is
      a better investment, she must establish minimum requirements for the investment. She determines that
      the new machine must return her initial investment back to her in three years at a rate of 20%, and the
      initial investment cost cannot exceed her future earnings. This established a baseline for what she
      considers reasonable for this type of investment, and she will not consider any investment alternative that
      does not meet these minimum criteria.

 4. Evaluate alternatives using screening and preference decisions.
      Now that she has established minimum requirements for the new machine, she can evaluate each of
      these machines to see if they meet or exceed her criteria. The first sewing machine costs $45,000. She is
      expected to recoup her initial investment in two-and-a-half years. The return rate is 25%, and her future
      earnings would exceed the initial cost of the machine.
      The second machine will cost $55,000. She expects to recoup her initial investment in three years. The
      return rate is $18%, and her future earnings would be less than the initial cost of the machine.

 5. Make the decision.

2 Jack Ewing and Jad Mouawad. "VW Cuts Its R&D Budget in Face of Costly Emissions Scandal." New York Times. November 20, 2015.
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/21/business/international/volkswagen-emissions-scandal.html
3 Jack Ewing and Jad Mouawad. "VW Cuts Its R&D Budget in Face of Costly Emissions Scandal." New York Times. November 20, 2015.
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/21/business/international/volkswagen-emissions-scandal.html
570                                                                               Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions

       Melanie will now decide which sewing machine to invest in. The first machine meets or exceeds her
       established minimum requirements in cost, payback, return rate, and future earnings compared to the
       initial investment. For the second machine, the $55,000 cost exceeds the cash available for investment. In
       addition, the second machine does not meet the return rate of 20% and the anticipated future earnings
       does not compare well to the value of the initial investment. Based on this information, Melanie would
       choose to purchase the first sewing machine.
       These steps make it seem as if narrowing down the alternatives and making a selection is a simple
       process. However, a company needs to use analysis techniques, including the payback method and the
       accounting rate of return method, as well as other, more sophisticated and complex techniques, to help
       them make screening and preference decisions. These techniques can assist management in making a
       final investment decision that is best for the company. We begin learning about these various screening
       and preference decisions in Evaluate the Payback and Accounting Rate of Return in Capital

     LINK TO LEARNING

     More and more companies are using capital expenditure software in budgeting analysis management.
     One company using this software is Solarcentury, a United Kingdom-based solar company. Read this
     case study on Solarcentury's advantages to capital budgeting resulting from this software investment
     (https://openstax.org/l/50Solarcentury) to learn more.

 11.2 Evaluate the Payback and Accounting Rate of Return in Capital
Investment Decisions

Many companies are presented with investment opportunities continuously and must sift through both viable
and nonviable options to identify the best possible expenditure for business growth. The process to select the
best option requires careful budgeting and analysis. In conducting their analysis, a company may use various
evaluation methods with differing inputs and analysis features. These methods are often broken into two
broad categories: (1) those that consider the time value of money, or the fact that a dollar today differs from a
dollar in the future due to inflation and the ability to invest today's money for future growth, and (2) those
analysis methods that do not consider the time value of money. We will examine the non-time value methods
first.

Non-Time Value Methods

Non-time value methods do not compare the value of a dollar today to the value of a dollar in the future and
are often used as screening tools. Two non-time value evaluative methods are the payback method and the
accounting rate of return.

Fundamentals of the Payback Method

The payback method (PM) computes the length of time it takes a company to recover their initial investment.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions  571

In other words, it calculates how long it will take until either the amount earned or the costs saved are equal to
or greater than the costs of the project. This can be useful when a company is focused solely on retrieving
their funds from a project investment as quickly as possible.
Businesses do not want their money tied up in capital assets that have limited liquidity. The longer money is
unavailable, the less ability the company has to use these funds for other growth purposes. This extended
length of time is also a concern because it produces a riskier opportunity. Therefore, a company would like to
get their money returned to them as quickly as possible. One way to focus on this is to consider the payback
period when making a capital budget decision. The payback method is limited in that it only considers the time
frame to recoup an investment based on expected annual cash flows, and it doesn't consider the effects of the
time value of money.
The payback period is calculated when there are even or uneven annual cash flows. Cash flow is money
coming into or out of the company as a result of a business activity. A cash inflow can be money received or
cost savings from a capital investment. A cash outflow can be money paid or increased cost expenditures
from capital investment. Cash flow will estimate the ability of the company to pay long-term debt, its liquidity,
and its ability to grow. Cash flows appear on the statement of cash flows. Cash flows are different than net
income. Net income will represent all company activities affecting revenues and expenses regardless of the
occurrence of a cash transaction and will appear on the income statement.
A company will estimate the future cash inflows and outflows to be generated by the capital investment. It's
important to remember that the cash inflows can be caused by an increase in cash receipts or by a reduction
in cash expenditures. For example, if a new piece of equipment would reduce the production costs for a
company from $120,000 a year to $80,000 a year, we would consider this is a $40,000 cash inflow. While the
company does not actually receive the $40,000 in cash, it does save $40,000 in operating costs giving it a
positive cash inflow of $40,000.
Cash flow can also be generated through increased production volume. For example, a company purchases a
new building costing $100,000 that will allow them to house more space for production. This new space allows
them to produce more product to sell, which increases cash sales by $300,000. The $300,000 is a new cash
inflow.
The difference between cash inflows and cash outflows is the net cash inflow or outflow, depending on which
cash flow is larger.

Annual net cash flows are then related to the initial investment to determine a payback period in years. When
the expected net annual cash flow is an even amount each period, payback can be computed as follows:

The result is the number of years it will take to recover the cash made in the original investment. For example,
a printing company is considering a printer with an initial investment cost of $150,000. They expect an annual
net cash flow of $20,000. The payback period is

                                              Payback Period = $150,000 $20,000 = 7.5 years
572  Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions

The initial investment cost of $150,000 is divided by the annual cash flow of $20,000 to compute an expected
payback period of 7.5 years. Depending on the company's payback period requirements for this type of
investment, they may pass this option through the screening process to be considered in a preference
decision. For example, the company might require a payback period of 5 years. Since 7.5 years is greater than
5 years, the company would probably not consider moving this alternative to a preference decision. If the
company required a payback period of 9 years, the company would consider moving this alternative to a
preference decision, since the number of years is less than the requirement.

When net annual cash flows are uneven over the years, as opposed to even as in the previous example, the
company requires a more detailed calculation to determine payback. Uneven cash flows occur when different
amounts are returned each year. In the previous printing company example, the initial investment cost was
$150,000 and even cash flows were $20,000 per year. However, in most examples, organizations experience
uneven cash flows in a multiple-year ownership period. For example, an uneven cash flow distribution might
be a return of $10,000 in year one, $20,000 in years two and three, $15,000 in years four and five, and $20,000
in year six and beyond.

In this case, then, the payback period is 8.5 years.
In a second example of the payback period for uneven cash flows, consider a company that will need to
determine the net cash flow for each period and figure out the point at which cash flows equal or exceed the
initial investment. This could arise in the middle of a year, prompting a calculation to determine the partial
year payback.

The company would add the partial year payback to the prior years' payback to get the payback period for
uneven cash flows. For example, a company may make an initial investment of $40,000 and receive net cash
flows of $10,000 in years one and two, $5,000 in year three and four, and $7,500 for years five and beyond.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions  573

Figure 11.3 Cash Flow. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

We know that somewhere between years 5 and 6, the company recovers the money. In years one and two they
recovered a total of $20,000 (10,000 + 10,000), in years three and four they recovered and additional $10,000
(5,000 + 5,000), and in year five they recovered $7,500, for a total through year five of $37,500. This left an
outstanding balance after year five of $2,500 (40,000 - 37,500) to fully recover the costs of the investment. In
year six, they had a cash flow of $7,500. This is more than they needed to recoup their initial investment. To get
a more specific calculation, we need to compute the partial year's payback.

                                     Partial Year Payback = $2,500 $7,500 = 0.33 years (rounded)
Therefore, the total payback period is 5.33 years (5 years + 0.33 years).

Demonstration of the Payback Method

For illustration, consider Baby Goods Manufacturing (BGM), a large manufacturing company specializing in the
production of various baby products sold to retailers. BGM is considering investment in a new metal press
machine. The payback period is calculated as follows:

                                              Payback Period = $50,000 $15,000 = 3.33 years
We divide the initial investment of $50,000 by the annual inflow of $15,000 to arrive at a payback period of 3.33
years. Assume that BGM will not allow a payback period of more than 7 years for this type of investment. Since
this computed payback period meets their initial screening requirement, they can pass this investment
opportunity on to a preference decision level. If BGM had an expected or maximum allowable payback period
of 2 years, the same investment would not have passed their screening requirement and would be dropped
from consideration.

To illustrate the concept of uneven cash flows, let's assume BGM shows the following expected net cash flows
instead. Recall that that the initial investment in the metal press machine is $50,000.
574  Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions

Between years 6 and 7, the initial investment outstanding balance is recovered. To determine the more specific
payback period, we calculate the partial year payback.

                                               Payback Period = $5,000 $10,000 = 0.5 years
The total payback period is 6.5 years (6 years + 0.5 years).

   THINK IT THROUGH

   Capital Investment

   You are the accountant at a large firm looking to make a capital investment in a future project. Your
   company is considering two project investments. Project A's payback period is 3 years, and Project B's
   payback period is 5.5 years.
   Your company requires a payback period of no more than 5 years on such projects. Which project should
   they further consider? Why? Is there an argument that can be made to advance either project or neither
   project? Why? What other factors might be necessary to make that decision?

Fundamentals of the Accounting Rate of Return Method

The accounting rate of return (ARR) computes the return on investment considering changes to net income.
It shows how much extra income the company could expect if it undertakes the proposed project. Unlike the
payback method, ARR compares income to the initial investment rather than cash flows. This method is useful
because it reviews revenues, cost savings, and expenses associated with the investment and, in some cases,
can provide a more complete picture of the impact, rather than focusing solely on the cash flows produced.
However, ARR is limited in that it does not consider the value of money over time, similar to the payback
method.
The accounting rate of return is computed as follows:

Incremental revenues represent the increase to revenue if the investment is made, as opposed to if the
investment is rejected. The increase to revenues includes any cost savings that occur because of the project.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions  575

Incremental expenses show the change to expenses if the project is accepted as opposed to maintaining the
current conditions. Incremental expenses also include depreciation of the acquired asset. The difference
between incremental revenues and incremental expenses is called the incremental net income. The initial
investment is the original amount invested in the project; however, any salvage (residual) value for the capital
asset needs to be subtracted from the initial investment before obtaining ARR.

The concept of salvage value was addressed in Long-Term Assets (http://cnx.org/content/m67894/latest/) .
Basically, it is the anticipated future fair market value (FMV) of an asset when it is to be sold or used as a trade-
in for a replacement asset. For example, assume that you bought a commercial printer for $40,000 five years
ago with an anticipated salvage value of $8,000, and you are now considering replacing it. Assume that as of
the date of replacement after the five-year holding period, the old printer has an FMV of $8,000. If the new
printer has a purchase price of $45,000 and the seller is going to take the old printer as a trade-in, then you
would owe $37,000 for the new printer. If the printer had been sold for $8,000, instead being used as a trade-
in, the $8,000 could have been used as a down payment, and the company would still owe $37,000. This
amount is the price of $45,000 minus the FMV value of $8,000.

There is one more point to make with this example. The fair market value is not the same as the book value.
The book value is the original cost less the accumulated depreciation that has been taken. For example, if you
buy a long-term asset for $60,000 and the accumulated depreciation that you have taken is $42,000, then the
asset's book value would be $18,000. The fair market value could be more, less, or the same as the book value.

For example, a piano manufacturer is considering investment in a new tuning machine. The initial investment
will cost $300,000. Incremental revenues, including cost savings, are $200,000, and incremental expenses,
including depreciation, are $125,000. ARR is computed as:

                                          ARR = ($200,000 - $125,000) $300,000 = 0.25 or 25%

This outcome means the company can expect an increase of 25% to net income, or an extra 25 cents on each
dollar, if they make the investment. The company will have a minimum expected return that this project will
need to meet or exceed before further consideration is given. ARR, like payback method, should not be used as
the sole determining factor to invest in a capital asset. Also, note that the ARR calculation does not consider
uneven annual income growth, or other depreciation methods besides straight-line depreciation.

Demonstration of the Accounting Rate of Return Method

Returning to the BGM example, the company is still considering the metal press machine because it passed
the payback period method of less than 7 years. BGM has a set rate of return of 25% expected for the metal
press machine investment. The company expects incremental revenues of $22,000 and incremental expenses
of $12,000. Remember that the initial investment cost is $50,000. BGM computes ARR as follows:

                                             ARR = ($20,000 - $5,000) $50,000 = 0.3 or 30%

The ARR in this situation is 30%, exceeding the required hurdle rate of 25%. A hurdle rate is the minimum
required rate of return on an investment to consider an alternative for further evaluation. In this case, BGM
would move this investment option to a preference decision level. If we were to add a salvage value of $5,000
576                                                                               Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions

into the situation, the computation would change as follows:
                                      ARR = ($20,000 - $5,000) $50,000 - $5,000) = 0.33 or 33% (rounded).

The ARR still exceeds the hurdle rate of 25%, so BGM would still forward the investment opportunity for further
consideration. Let's say BGM changes their required return rate to 35%. In both cases, the project ARR would
be less than the required rate, so BGM would not further consider either investment.

   YOUR TURN

   Analyzing Hurdle Rate

   Turner Printing is looking to invest in a printer, which costs $60,000. Turner expects a 15% rate of return
   on this printer investment. The company expects incremental revenues of $30,000 and incremental
   expenses of $15,000. There is no salvage value for the printer. What is the accounting rate of return (ARR)
   for this printer? Did it meet the hurdle rate of 15%?
   Solution
   ARR is 25% calculated as ($30,000 - $15,000) / $60,000. 25% exceeds the hurdle rate of 15%, so the
   company would consider moving this alternative to a preference decision.

Both the payback period and the accounting rate of return are useful analytical tools in certain situations,
particularly when used in conjunction with other evaluative techniques. In certain situations, the non-time
value methods can provide relevant and useful information. However, when considering projects with long
lives and significant costs to initiate, there are more advanced models that can be used. These models are
typically based on time value of money principles, the basics of which are explained here.

   YOUR TURN

   Analyzing Investments

   Your company is considering making an investment in equipment that will cost $240,000. The equipment
   is expected to generate annual cash flows of $60,000, provide incremental cash revenues of $200,000,
   and provide incremental cash expenses of $140,000 annually. Depreciation expense is included in the
   $140,000 incremental expense.
   Calculate the payback period and the accounting rate of return.
   Solution

                                       Payback Period = $240,000 = 4 years
                                                                  60,000

                                                    ARR = ($200,000 - $140,000) 240,000 = 25%

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions  577

 11.3 Explain the Time Value of Money and Calculate Present and Future
Values of Lump Sums and Annuities

Your mother gives you $100 cash for a birthday present, and says, "Spend it wisely." You want to purchase the
latest cellular telephone on the market but wonder if this is really the best use of your money. You have a
choice: You can spend the money now or spend it in the future. What should you do? Is there a benefit to
spending it now as opposed to saving for later use? Does time have an impact on the value of your money in
the future? Businesses are confronted with these questions and more when deciding how to allocate
investment money. A major factor that affects their investment decisions is the concept of the time value of
money.

Time Value of Money Fundamentals

The concept of the time value of money asserts that the value of a dollar today is worth more than the value
of a dollar in the future. This is typically because a dollar today can be used now to earn more money in the
future. There is also, typically, the possibility of future inflation, which decreases the value of a dollar over time
and could lead to a reduction in economic buying power.

At this point, potential effects of inflation can probably best be demonstrated by a couple of examples. The
first example is the Ford Mustang. The first Ford Mustang sold in 1964 for $2,368. Today's cheapest Mustang
starts at a list price of $25,680. While a significant portion of this increase is due to additional features on
newer models, much of the increase is due to the inflation that occurred between 1964 and 2019.

Similar inflation characteristics can be demonstrated with housing prices. After World War II, a typical small
home often sold for between $16,000 and $30,000. Many of these same homes today are selling for hundreds
of thousands of dollars. Much of the increase is due to the location of the property, but a significant part is
also attributed to inflation. The annual inflation rate for the Mustang between 1964 and 2019 was
approximately 4.5%. If we assume that the home sold for $16,500 in 1948 and the price of the home in 2019
was about $500,000, that's an annual appreciation rate of almost 5%.

Today's dollar is also more valuable because there is less risk than if the dollar was in a long-term investment,
which may or may not yield the expected results. On the other hand, delaying payment from an investment
may be beneficial if there is an opportunity to earn interest. The longer payment is delayed, the more available
earning potential there is. This can be enticing to businesses and may persuade them to take on the risk of
deferment.

Businesses consider the time value of money before making an investment decision. They need to know what
the future value is of their investment compared to today's present value and what potential earnings they
could see because of delayed payment. These considerations include present and future values.

Before you learn about present and future values, it is important to examine two types of cash flows: lump
sums and annuities.

Lump Sums and Annuities

A lump sum is a one-time payment or repayment of funds at a particular point in time. A lump sum can be
either a present value or future value. For a lump sum, the present value is the value of a given amount today.
For example, if you deposited $5,000 into a savings account today at a given rate of interest, say 6%, with the
goal of taking it out in exactly three years, the $5,000 today would be a present value-lump sum. Assume for
578  Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions

simplicity's sake that the account pays 6% at the end of each year, and it also compounds interest on the
interest earned in any earlier years.

In our current example, interest is calculated once a year. However, interest can also be calculated in
numerous ways. Some of the most common interest calculations are daily, monthly, quarterly, or annually.
One concept important to understand in interest calculations is that of compounding. Compounding is the
process of earning interest on previous interest earned, along with the interest earned on the original
investment.

Returning to our example, if $5,000 is deposited into a savings account for three years earning 6% interest
compounded annually, the amount the $5,000 investment would be worth at the end of three years is
$5,955.08 ($5,000 × 1.06 - $5,300 × 1.06 - $5,618 × 1.06 - $5,955.08). The $5,955.08 is the future value of $5,000
invested for three years at 6%. More formally, future value is the amount to which either a single investment
or a series of investments will grow over a specified time at a given interest rate or rates. The initial $5,000
investment is the present value. Again, more formally, present value is the current value of a single future
investment or a series of investments for a specified time at a given interest rate or rates. Another way to
phrase this is to say the $5,000 is the present value of $5,955.08 when the initial amount was invested at 6% for
three years. The interest earned over the three-year period would be $955.08, and the remaining $5,000 would
be the original deposit of $5,000.

As shown in the example the future value of a lump sum is the value of the given investment at some point in
the future. It is also possible to have a series of payments that constitute a series of lump sums. Assume that a
business receives the following four cash flows. They constitute a series of lump sums because they are not all
the same amount.

The company would be receiving a stream of four cash flows that are all lump sums. In some situations, the
cash flows that occur each time period are the same amount; in other words, the cash flows are even each
period. These types of even cash flows occurring at even intervals, such as once a year, are known as an
annuity. The following figure shows an annuity that consists of four payments of $12,000 made at the end of
each of four years.

The nature of cash flows--single sum cash flows, even series of cash flows, or uneven series of cash
flows--have different effects on compounding.

Compounding

Compounding can be applied in many types of financial transactions, such as funding a retirement account or
college savings account. Assume that an individual invests $10,000 in a four-year certificate of deposit account
that pays 10% interest at the end of each year (in this case 12/31). Any interest earned during the year will be

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions                                                    579

retained until the end of the four-year period and will also earn 10% interest annually.

Through the effects of compounding--earning interest on interest--the investor earned $4,641 in interest
from the four-year investment. If the investor had removed the interest earned instead of reinvesting it in the
account, the investor would have earned $1,000 a year for four years, or $4,000 interest ($10,000 × 10% =
$1,000 per year × 4 years = $4,000 total interest). Compounding is a concept that is used to determine future
value (more detailed calculations of future value will be covered later in this section). But what about present
value? Does compounding play a role in determining present value? The term applied to finding present value
is called discounting.

Discounting

Discounting is the procedure used to calculate the present value of an individual payment or a series of
payments that will be received in the future based on an assumed interest rate or return on investment. Let's
look at a simple example to explain the concept of discounting.

Assume that you want to accumulate sufficient funds to buy a new car and that you will need $5,000 in three
years. Also, assume that your invested funds will earn 8% a year for the three years, and you reinvest any
interest earned during the three-year period. If you wanted to take out adequate funds from your savings
account to fund the three-year investment, you would need to invest $3,969.16 today and invest it in the
account earning 8% for three years. After three years, the $3,969.16 would earn $1,030.84 and grow to exactly
the $5,000 that you will need. This is an example of discounting. Discounting is the method by which we take a
future value and determine its current, or present, value. An understanding of future value applications and
calculations will aid in the understanding of present value uses and calculations.

Future Value

There are benefits to investing money now in hopes of a larger return in the future. These future earnings are
possible because of interest payments received as an incentive for tying up money long-term. Knowing what
these future earnings will be can help a business decide if the current investment is worth the long-term
potential. Recall, the future value (FV) as the value of an investment after a certain period of time. Future
value considers the initial amount invested, the time period of earnings, and the earnings interest rate in the
calculation. For example, a bank would consider the future value of a loan based on whether a long-time client
meets a certain interest rate return when determining whether to approve the loan.

To determine future value, the bank would need some means to determine the future value of the loan. The
bank could use formulas, future value tables, a financial calculator, or a spreadsheet application. The same is
true for present value calculations. Due to the variety of calculators and spreadsheet applications, we will
present the determination of both present and future values using tables. In many college courses today,
these tables are used primarily because they are relatively simple to understand while demonstrating the
580                                                                               Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions

material. For those who prefer formulas, the different formulas used to create each table are printed at the top
of the corresponding table. In many finance classes, you will learn how to utilize the formulas. Regarding the
use of a financial calculator, while all are similar, the user manual or a quick internet search will provide
specific directions for each financial calculator. As for a spreadsheet application such as Microsoft Excel, there
are some common formulas, shown in Table 11.2. In addition, Appendix C provides links to videos and tutorials
on using specific aspects of Excel, such as future and present value techniques.

                                        Excel Formulas

     Time Value Component      Excel Formula Shorthand                            Excel Formula Detailed

Present Value Single Sum       =PV                                                =PV(Rate, N, Payment, FV)

Future Value Single Sum        +FV                                                =FV(Rate, N, Payment, PV)

Present Value Annuity          =PV                                                =PV(Rate, N, Payment, FV, Type)

Future Value Annuity           =FV                                                =FV(Rate, N, Payment, PV, Type)

Net Present Value              =NPV                                               =NPV(Rate, CF2, CF3, CF4) + CF1

Internal Rate of Return        =IRR                                               =IRR(Invest, CF1, CF2, CF3)

Rate = annual interest rate

N = number of periods

Payment = annual payment amount, entered as a negative number, use 0 when calculating both present
value of a single sum and future value of a single sum

FV = future value

PV = current or present value

Type = 0 for regular annuity, 1 for annuity due

CF = cash flow for a period, thus CF1 - cash flow period 1, CF2 - cash flow period 2, etc.

Invest = initial investment entered as a negative number

Table 11.2

Since we will be using the tables in the examples in the body of the chapter, it is important to know there are
four possible table, each used under specific conditions (Table 11.3.

                                        Time Value of Money Tables

                             Situation                                            Table Heading

Future Value - Lump Sum                                                           Future Value of $1

Table 11.3

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions                                                                      581

                                                   Time Value of Money Tables

                                        Situation                              Table Heading

Future Value - Annuity (even payment stream)                                   Future Value of an Annuity

Present Value - Lump Sum                                                       Present Value of $1

Present Value - Annuity (even payment stream)                                  Present Value of an Annuity

Table 11.3

In the prior situation, the bank would use either the Future Value of $1 table or Future Value of an Ordinary
Annuity table, samples of which are provided in Appendix B. To use the correct table, the bank needs to
determine whether the customer will pay them back at the end of the loan term or periodically throughout the
term of the loan. The Future Value of $1 table is used if the customer will pay back at the end of the period; if
the payments will be made periodically throughout the term of the loan, they will use the Future Value of an
Annuity table. Choosing the correct table to use is critical for accurate determination of the future value. The
application in other business matters is the same: a business needs to also consider if they are making an
investment with a repayment in one lump sum or in an annuity structure before choosing a table and making
the calculation. In the tables, the columns show interest rates (i) and the rows show periods (n). The interest
columns represent the anticipated interest rate payout for that investment. Interest rates can be based on
experience, industry standards, federal fiscal policy expectations, and risk investment. Periods represent the
number of years until payment is received. The intersection of the expected payout years and the interest rate
is a number called a future value factor. The future value factor is multiplied by the initial investment cost to
produce the future value of the expected cash flows (or investment return).

Future Value of $1

A lump sum payment is the present value of an investment when the return will occur at the end of the period
in one installment. To determine this return, the Future Value of $1 table is used.

For example, you are saving for a vacation you plan to take in 6 years and want to know how much your initial
savings will yield in the future. You decide to place $4,500 in an investment account now that yields an
anticipated annual return of 8%. Looking at the FV table, n = 6 years, and i = 8%, which return a future value
factor of 1.587. Multiplying this factor by the initial investment amount of $4,500 produces $7,141.50. This
means your initial savings of $4,500 will be worth approximately $7,141.50 in 6 years.
582  Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions

Future Value of an Ordinary Annuity

An ordinary annuity is one in which the payments are made at the end of each period in equal installments. A
future value ordinary annuity looks at the value of the current investment in the future, if periodic payments
were made throughout the life of the series.

For example, you are saving for retirement and expect to contribute $10,000 per year for the next 15 years to a
401(k) retirement plan. The plan anticipates a periodic interest yield of 12%. How much would your investment
be worth in the future meeting these criteria? In this case, you would use the Future Value of an Ordinary
Annuity table. The relevant factor where n = 15 and i = 12% is 37.280. Multiplying the factor by the amount of
the cash flow yields a future value of these installment savings of (37.280 × $10,000) $372,800. Therefore, you
could expect your investment to be worth $372,800 at the end of 15 years, given the parameters.

Let's now examine how present value differs from future value in use and computation.

   YOUR TURN
   Determining Future Value

   Determine the future value for each of the following situations. Use the future value tables provided in
   Appendix B when needed, and round answers to the nearest cent where required.
     A. You are saving for a car and you put away $5,000 in a savings account. You want to know how much

          your initial savings will be worth in 7 years if you have an anticipated annual interest rate of 5%.
     B. You are saving for retirement and make contributions of $11,500 per year for the next 14 years to

          your 403(b) retirement plan. The interest rate yield is 8%.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions                                                                           583

Solution

A. Use FV of $1 table. Future value factor where n = 7 and i = 5 is 1.407. 1.407 × 5,000 = $7,035. B. Use FV of
an ordinary annuity table. Future value factor where n = 14 and i = 8 is 24.215. 24.215 × 11,500 =
$278,472.50.

Present Value

It is impossible to compare the value or potential purchasing power of the future dollar to today's dollar; they
exist in different times and have different values. Present value (PV) considers the future value of an
investment expressed in today's value. This allows a company to see if the investment's initial cost is more or
less than the future return. For example, a bank might consider the present value of giving a customer a loan
before extending funds to ensure that the risk and the interest earned are worth the initial outlay of cash.

Similar to the Future Value tables, the columns show interest rates (i) and the rows show periods (n) in the
Present Value tables. Periods represent how often interest is compounded (paid); that is, periods could
represent days, weeks, months, quarters, years, or any interest time period. For our examples and
assessments, the period (n) will almost always be in years. The intersection of the expected payout years (n)
and the interest rate (i) is a number called a present value factor. The present value factor is multiplied by the
initial investment cost to produce the present value of the expected cash flows (or investment return).

The two tables provided in Appendix B for present value are the Present Value of $1 and the Present Value of
an Ordinary Annuity. As with the future value tables, choosing the correct table to use is critical for accurate
determination of the present value.

Present Value of $1

When referring to present value, the lump sum return occurs at the end of a period. A business must
determine if this delayed repayment, with interest, is worth the same as, more than, or less than the initial
investment cost. If the deferred payment is more than the initial investment, the company would consider an
investment.

To calculate present value of a lump sum, we should use the Present Value of $1 table. For example, you are
interested in saving money for college and want to calculate how much you would need put in the bank today
to return a sum of $40,000 in 10 years. The bank returns an interest rate of 3% per year during these 10 years.
Looking at the PV table, n = 10 years and i = 3% returns a present value factor of 0.744. Multiplying this factor
by the return amount of $40,000 produces $29,760. This means you would need to put in the bank now
approximately $29,760 to have $40,000 in 10 years.
584  Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions

As mentioned, to determine the present value or future value of cash flows, a financial calculator, a program
such as Excel, knowledge of the appropriate formulas, or a set of tables must be used. Though we illustrate
examples in the text using tables, we recognize the value of these other calculation instruments and have
included chapter assessments that use multiple approaches to determining present and future value.
Knowledge of different approaches to determining present and future value is useful as there are situations,
such as having fractional interest rates, 8.45% for example, in which a financial calculator or a program such as
Excel would be needed to accurately determine present or future value.

Annuity Table

As discussed previously, annuities are a series of equal payments made over time, and ordinary annuities pay
the equal installment at the end of each payment period within the series. This can help a business
understand how their periodic returns translate into today's value.
For example, assume that Sam needs to borrow money for college and anticipates that she will be able to
repay the loan in $1,200 annual payments for each of 5 years. If the lender charges 5% per year for similar
loans, how much cash would the bank be willing to lend Sam today? In this case, she would use the Present
Value of an Ordinary Annuity table in Appendix B, where n = 5 and i = 5%. This yields a present value factor of
4.329. The current value of the cash flow each period is calculated as 4.329 × $1,200 = $5,194.80. Therefore, Sam
could borrow $5,194.80 now given the repayment parameters.

Our focus has been on examples of ordinary annuities (annuities due and other more complicated annuity
examples are addressed in advanced accounting courses). With annuities due, the cash flow occurs at the

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions                                                                          585

start of the period. For example, if you wanted to deposit a lump sum of money into an account and make
monthly rent payments starting today, the first payment would be made the same day that you made the
deposit into the funding account. Because of this timing difference in the withdrawals from the annuity due,
the process of calculating annuity due is somewhat different from the methods that you've covered for
ordinary annuities.

   YOUR TURN

   Determining Present Value

   Determine the present value for each of the following situations. Use the present value tables provided
   in Appendix B when needed, and round answers to the nearest cent where required.

     a. You are saving for college and you want to return a sum of $100,000 in 12 years. The bank returns an
          interest rate of 5% after these 12 years.

     b. You need to borrow money for college and can afford a yearly payment to the lending institution of
          $1,000 per year for the next 8 years. The interest rate charged by the lending institution is 3% per
          year.

   Solution
   a. Use PV of $1 table. Present value factor where n = 12 and i = 5 is 0.557. 0.557 × $100,000 = $55,700. b.
   Use PV of an ordinary annuity table. Present value factor where n = 8 and i = 3 is 7.020. 7.020 × $1,000 =
   $7,020.

LINK TO LEARNING

For a lucky few, winning the lottery can be a dream come true and the option to take a one-time payout
or receive payments over several years does not seem to matter at the time. This lottery payout
calculator (https://openstax.org/l/50LotteryCalc) shows how time value of money may affect your take-
home winnings.

 11.4 Use Discounted Cash Flow Models to Make Capital Investment
Decisions

Your company, Rudolph Incorporated, has begun analyzing two potential future project alternatives that have
passed the basic screening using the non-time value methods of determining the payback period and the
accounting rate of return. Both proposed projects seem reasonable, but your company typically selects only
one option to pursue. Which one should you choose? How will you decide? A discounted cash flow model can
assist with this process. In this section, we will discuss two commonly used time value of money-based
options: the net present value method (NPV) and the internal rate of return (IRR). Both of these methods are
based on the discounted cash flow process.
586  Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions

Fundamentals of the Discounted Cash Flow Model

The discount cash flow model assigns a value to a business opportunity using time-value measurement
tools. The model considers future cash flows of the project, discounts them back to present time, and
compares the outcome to an expected rate of return. If the outcome exceeds the expected rate of return and
initial investment cost, the company would consider the investment. If the outcome does not exceed the
expected rate of return or the initial investment, the company may not consider investment. When considering
the discounted cash flow process, the time value of money plays a major role.

Time Value-Based Methods

As previously discussed, time value of money methods assume that the value of money today is worth more
now than in the future. The payback period and accounting rate of return methods do not consider this
concept when performing calculations and analyzing results. That is why they are typically only used as basic
screening tools. To decide the best option between alternatives, a company performs preference
measurement using tools, such as net present value and internal rate of return that do consider the time value
of money concept. Net present value (NPV) discounts future cash flows to their present value at the expected
rate of return and compares that to the initial investment. NPV does not determine the actual rate of return
earned by a project. The internal rate of return (IRR) shows the profitability or growth potential of an
investment at the point where NPV equals zero, so it determines the actual rate of return a project earns. As
the name implies, net present value is stated in dollars, whereas the internal rate of return is stated as an
interest rate. Both NPV and IRR require the company to determine a rate of return to be used as the target
return rate, such as the minimum required rate of return or the weighted average cost of capital, which will be
discussed in Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures.

A positive NPV implies that the present value of the cash inflows from the project are greater than the present
value of the cash outflows, which represent the expenses and costs associated with the project. In an NPV
calculation, a positive NPV is typically considered a potentially good investment or project. However, other
extenuating circumstances should be considered. For example, the company might not wish to borrow the
necessary funding to make the investment because the company might be anticipating a downturn in the
national economy.

An IRR analysis compares the calculated IRR with either a predetermined rate of return or the cost of
borrowing the money to invest in the project in order to determine whether a potential investment or project
is favorable. For example, assume that the investment or equipment purchase is expected to generate an IRR
of 15% and the company's expected rate of return is 12%. In this case, similar to the NPV calculation, we
assume that the proposed investment would be undertaken. However, remember that other factors must be
considered, as they are with NPV.

When considering cash inflows--whether using NPV or IRR--the accountant should examine both profits
generated or expenses reduced. Investments that are made may generate additional revenue or could reduce
production costs. Both cases assume that the new product or other type of investment generates a positive
cash inflow that will be compared to the cost outflows to determine whether there is an overall positive or
negative net present value.

Additionally, a company would determine whether the projects being considered are mutually exclusive or not.
If the projects or investment options are mutually exclusive, the company can evaluate and identify more than
one alternative as a viable project or investment, but they can only invest in one option. For example, if a

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions                                                                        587

company needs one new delivery truck, it might solicit proposals from five different truck dealers and conduct
NPV and IRR evaluations. Even if all proposals pass the financial requirements of the NPV and IRR methods,
only one proposal will be accepted.

Another consideration occurs when a company has the ability to evaluate and accept multiple proposals. For
example, an automobile manufacturer is considering expanding its number of dealerships in the United States
over the next ten-year period and has allocated $30,000,000 to buy the land. They could purchase any number
of properties. They conduct NPV and IRR analyses of fifteen properties and determine that four meet their
required standards and market feasibility needs and then purchase those four properties. The opportunities
were not mutually exclusive: the number of properties purchased was driven by research and expansion
projections, not by their need for only one option.

   CONTINUING APPLICATION AT WORK

   Capital Budgeting Decisions

   Gearhead Outfitters has expanded to many locations throughout its twenty-plus years in business. How
   did company management decide to expand? One of the financial tools a business can use is capital
   budgeting, which addresses many different issues involving the use of current cash flow for future
   return. As you've learned, capital outlay decisions can be evaluated through payback period, net present
   value, and methods involving rates of return.

   With this in mind, think about the capital budgeting issues Gearhead's management might have faced.
   For example, in deciding to expand, should the company buy a building or lease one? What method
   should be used to evaluate this? Purchasing a building might require more initial outlay, but the
   company will retain an asset. How will such a decision affect the bottom line? With respect to equipment,
   Gearhead could maintain a fleet of vehicles. Should the vehicles be purchased or leased? What will need
   to be considered in the process?

   In developing and maintaining its strategy for sustainability, a business must not only consider day-to-
   day operations, but also address long-term decisions. Common capital budgeting items like equipment
   purchases to increase efficiency or reduce costs, decisions about replacement versus repair, and
   expansion all involve significant cash outlay. How will these items be evaluated? How long will recouping
   the initial investment take? How much revenue will be generated (or costs saved) through capital outlay?
   Does the company require a minimum rate of return before it moves forward with investment? If so, how
   is that return determined? Considering Gearhead's decision to expand, what are some specific capital
   budgeting decisions important for the company to consider in their long-term strategy?

Basic Characteristics of the Net Present Value Model

Net present value helps companies choose between alternatives at a particular point in time by determining
which produces the higher NPV. To determine the NPV, the initial investment is subtracted from the present
value of cash inflows and outflows associated with a project at a required rate of return. If the outcome is
positive, the company should consider investment. If the outcome is negative, the company would forgo
investment.

We previously discussed the calculation for present value using the present value tables, where n is the
588  Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions

number of years and i is the expected interest rate. Once the present value factor is determined, it is
multiplied by the expected net cash flows to produce the present value of future cash flows. The initial
investment is subtracted from this present value calculation to determine the net present value.

Recall that the Present Value of $1 table is used for a lump sum payout, whereas the Present Value of an
Ordinary Annuity table is used for a series of equal payments occurring at the end of each period. Taking this
distinction one step further, NPV requires use of different tables depending on whether the future cash flows
are equal or unequal in each time period. If the cash flows each period are equal, the company uses the
Present Value of an Ordinary Annuity table, where the present value factor is multiplied by the cash flow
amount for one period to get the present value. If the cash flows each period are unequal, the company uses
the Present Value of $1 table, where the total present value is the sum of each of the unequal cash flows
multiplied by the appropriate present value factor for each time period. This concept is discussed in the
following example.

Assume that your company, Rudolph Incorporated, is determining the NPV for a new X-ray machine. The X-ray
machine has an initial investment of $200,000 and an expected cash flow of $40,000 each period for the next 10
years. The expected $40,000 cash flows from the new X-ray machine can be attributed to either additional
revenue generated or cost savings realized by more efficient operations of the new machine. Since these
annual cash flows of $40,000 are the same amount in each period over the ten-years this will be a stream of
annuity amounts received. The required rate of return on such an investment is 8%. The present value factor (i
= 8, n = 10) is 6.710 using the Present Value of an Ordinary Annuity table. Multiplying the present value factor
(6.710) by the equal cash flow ($40,000) gives a present value of $268,400. NPV is found by taking the present
value of $268,400 and subtracting the initial investment of $200,000 to arrive at $68,400. This is a positive NPV,
so the company would consider investment.

If there are two investments that have a positive NPV, and the investments are mutually exclusive, meaning
only one can be chosen, the more profitable of the two investments is typically the appropriate one for a
company to choose. We can also use the profitability index to compare them. The profitability index measures
the amount of profit returned for each dollar invested in a project. This is particularly useful when projects
being evaluated are of a different size, as the profitability index scales the projects to make them comparable.
The profitability index is found by taking the present value of the net cash flows and dividing by the initial
investment cost.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions                                                                         589

For example, Rudolph Incorporated is considering the X-ray machine that had present value cash flows of
$268,400 (not considering salvage value) and an initial investment cost of $200,000. Another x-ray equipment
option, option B, produces present value cash flows of $290,000 and an initial investment cost of $240,000. The
profitability index is computed as follows.

                                                     Option A: $268,400 $200,000 = 1.342
                                                     Option B: $290,000 $240,000 = 1.208

Based on this outcome, the company would invest in Option A, the project with a higher profitability index of
1.342.

If there were unequal cash flows each period, the Present Value of $1 table would be used with a more
complex calculation. Each year's present value factor is determined and multiplied by that year's cash flow.
Then all cash flows are added together to get one overall present value figure. This overall present value figure
is used when finding the difference between present value and the initial investment cost.

For example, let's say the X-ray machine information is the same, except now cash flows are as follows:

To find the overall present value, the following calculations take place using the present value of $1 table.

The Present Value of $1 table is used because, each year, a new "lump sum" cash flow is received, so the cash
590  Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions

flow in each period is different. The cash flows are treated as one-time lump sum payouts during that year.
The present value for each period looks at each year's present value factor at an interest rate of 8%. All the PVs
are added together for a total present value of $219,990. The initial investment of $200,000 is subtracted from
the $219,990 to arrive at a positive NPV of $19,990. In this case, the company would consider investment since
the outcome is positive. (More complex considerations, such as depreciation, the effects of income taxes, and
inflation, which could affect the overall NPV, are covered in advanced accounting courses.)

   YOUR TURN

   Analyzing a Postage Meter Investment

   Yellow Industries is considering investment in a new postage meter system. The postage meter system
   would have an initial investment cost of $135,000. Annual net cash flows are $40,000 for the next 5 years,
   and the expected interest rate return is 10%. Calculate net present value and decide whether or not
   Yellow Industries should invest in the new postage meter system.
   Solution
   Use the Present Value of an Ordinary Annuity table. Present value factor at n = 5 and i = 10% is 3.791.
   Present value = 3.791 × $40,000 = $151,640. NPV = $151,640 - $135,000 = $16,640. In this case, Yellow
   Industries should invest since the NPV is positive.

Calculation and Discussion of the Results of the Net Present Value Model

To demonstrate NPV, assume that a company, Rayford Machining, is considering buying a drill press that will
have an initial investment cost of $50,000 and annual cash flows of $10,000 for the next 7 years. Assume that
Rayford expects a 5% rate of return on such an investment. We need to determine the NPV when cash flows
are equal. The present value factor (i = 5, n = 7) is 5.786 using the Present Value of an Ordinary Annuity table.
We multiply 5.786 by the equal cash flow of $10,000 to get a present value of $57,860. NPV is found by taking
the present value of $57,860 and subtracting the initial investment of $50,000 to arrive at $7,860. This is a
positive NPV, so the company would consider the investment.

Let's say Rayford Machining has another option, Option B, for a drill press purchase with an initial investment
cost of $56,000 that produces present value cash flows of $60,500. The profitability index is computed as
follows.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions                                                                         591

                                                      Option A: $57,860 $50,000 = 1.157
                                                      Option B: $60,500 $56,000 = 1.080

Based on this outcome, the company would invest in Option A, the project with a higher profitability potential
of 1.157.

Now let's assume cash flows are unequal. Unequal cash flow information for Rayford Machining is
summarized here.

To find the overall present value, the following calculations take place using the Present Value of $1 table.

The present value for each period looks at each year's present value factor at an interest rate of 5%. All
individual year present values are added together for a total present value of $44,982. The initial investment of
$50,000 is subtracted from the $44,982 to arrive at a negative NPV of $5,018. In this case, Rayford Machining
would not invest, since the outcome is negative. The negative NPV value does not mean the investment would
be unprofitable; rather, it means the investment does not return the desired 5% the company is looking for in
the investments that it makes.

Basic Characteristics of the Internal Rate of Return Model

The internal rate of return model allows for the comparison of profitability or growth potential among
alternatives. All external factors, such as inflation, are removed from calculation, and the project with the
highest return rate percentage is considered for investment.

IRR is the discounted rate (interest rate) point at which NPV equals zero. In other words, the IRR is the point at
which the present value cash inflows equal the initial investment cost. To consider investment, IRR needs to
meet or exceed the required rate of return for the investment type. If IRR does not meet the required rate of
return, the company will forgo investment.

To find IRR using the present value tables, we need to know the cash flow number of return periods (n) and
592  Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions

the intersecting present value factor. To calculate present value factor, we use the following formula.

We find the present value factor in the present value table in the row with the corresponding number of
periods (n). We find the matching interest rate (i) at this present value factor. The corresponding interest rate
at the number of periods (n) is the IRR. When cash flows are equal, use the Present Value of an Ordinary
Annuity table to find IRR.

For example, a car manufacturer needs to replace welding equipment. The initial investment cost is $312,000
and each annual net cash flow is $49,944 for the next 9 years. We need to find the internal rate of return for
this welding equipment. The expected rate of return for such a purchase is 6%. In this case, n = 9 and the
present value factor is computed as follows.

                                      Present Value Factor = $312,000 $49,944 = 6.247 (rounded)

Looking at the Present Value of an Ordinary Annuity table, where n = 9 and the present value factor is 6.247,
we discover that the corresponding return rate is 8%. This exceeds the expected return rate, so the company
would typically invest in the project.

If there is more than one viable option, the company will select the alternative with the highest IRR that
exceeds the expected rate of return.
Our tables are limited in scope, and therefore, a present value factor may fall in between two interest rates.
When this is the case, you may choose to identify an IRR range instead of a single interest rate figure. A
spreadsheet program or financial calculator can produce a more accurate result and can also be used when
cash flows are unequal.

Calculation and Discussion of the Results of the Internal Rate of Return Model

Assume that Rayford Machining wants to know the internal rate of return for the new drill press. The drill
press has an initial investment cost of $50,000 and an annual cash flow of $10,000 for each of the next seven
years. The company expects a 7% rate of return on this type of investment. We calculate the present value
factor as:

                                             Present Value Factor = $50,000 $10,000 = 5.000

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions  593

Scanning the Present Value of an Ordinary Annuity table reveals that the interest rate where the present value
factor is 5 and the number of periods is 7 is between 8 and 10%. Since the required rate of return was 7%,
Rayford would consider investment in this metal press machine.

Consider another example using Rayford, where they have two drill press purchase options. Option A has an
IRR between 8% and 10%. The other option, Option B, has an initial investment cost of $60,500 and equal
annual net cash flows of $13,256 for the next seven years. We calculate the present value factor as:

                                       Present Value Factor = $60,500 $13,256 = 4.564 (rounded)
Scanning the Present Value of an Ordinary Annuity table reveals that, when the present value factor is 4.564
and the number of periods is 7, the interest rate is 12%. This not only exceeds the 7% required rate, it also
exceeds Option A's return of 8% to 10%. Therefore, if resources were limited, Rayford would select Option B
over Option A.

Final Summary of the Discounted Cash Flow Models

The internal rate of return (IRR) and the net present value (NPV) methods are types of discounted cash flow
analysis that require taking estimated future payments from a project and discounting them into present
values. The difference between the two methods is that the NPV calculation determines the project's
estimated return in dollars and the IRR provides the percentage rate of return from a project needed to break
even.
When the NPV is determined to be $0, the present value of the cash inflows and the present value of the cash
outflows are equal. For example, assume that the present value of the cash inflows is $10,000 and the present
value of the cash outflows is also $10,000. In this example, the NPV would be $0. At a net present value of zero,
594  Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions

the IRR would be exactly equal to the interest rate that was used to perform the NPV calculation. For example,
in the previous example, where both the cash inflows and the cash outflows have present values of $10,000
and the NPV is $0, assume that they were discounted at an 8% interest rate. If you were to then calculate the
internal rate of return, the IRR would be 8%, the same interest rate that gave us an NPV of $0.

Overall, it is important to understand that a company must consider the time value of money when making
capital investment decisions. Knowing the present value of a future cash flow enables a company to better
select between alternatives. The net present value compares the initial investment cost to the present value of
future cash flows and requires a positive outcome before investment. The internal rate of return also considers
the present value of future cash flows but considers profitability stated in terms of percentage of return on the
investment or project. These models allows two or more options to be compared to eliminate bias with raw
financial figures.

   THINK IT THROUGH

   Choosing Investments

   Companies are presented with viable alternatives that sometimes produce nearly identical results and
   profitability goals. If they have the ability to invest in both alternatives, they may do so. But what about
   when resources are constrained? How do they choose which investment is best for their company?

   Consider this: you have two projects that met the payback period and accounting rate of return
   screenings identically. Project 1 produced an NPV of $45,000 and had an IRR between 5% and 8%. Project
   2 produced a NPV of $35,000 and had an IRR of 10%. This leaves you with a difficult choice, since each
   alternative has a measurement that exceeds the other and the other variables are the same. Which
   project would you invest in and why?

 11.5 Compare and Contrast Non-Time Value-Based Methods and Time Value-
Based Methods in Capital Investment Decisions

When an investment opportunity is presented to a company, there are many financial and non-financial
factors to consider. Using capital budgeting methods to narrow down the choices by removing unviable
alternatives is an important process for any successful business. The four methods for capital budgeting
analysis--payback period, accounting rate of return, net present value, and internal rate of return--all have
their strengths and weaknesses, which are discussed as follows.

Summary of the Strengths and Weaknesses of the Non-Time Value-Based Capital
Budgeting Methods

Non-time value-based capital budgeting methods are best used in an initial screening process when there are
many alternatives to choose from. Two such methods are payback method and accounting rate of return.
Their strengths and weaknesses are discussed in Table 11.4 and Table 11.5.
The payback method determines the length of time needed to recoup an investment.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions                                                       595

                                          Payback Method

Strengths                                                          Weaknesses

· Simple calculation                          · Does not consider time value of money
· Screens out many unviable alternatives      · Profitability of an investment is ignored
                                              · Cash flows beyond investment return are not
   quickly
· Removes high-risk investments from             considered

   consideration

Table 11.4

Accounting rate of return measures incremental increases to net income. This method has several strengths
and weaknesses that are similar to payback period but include a deeper evaluation of income.

                                        Accounting Rate of Return

Strengths                                                          Weaknesses

· Simple calculation                          · Does not consider the time value of money
· Screens out many unviable options quickly   · Return rates for the entire lifespan of the
· Considers the impact on income rather than
                                                 investment is not considered
   cash flows only (profitability)            · External factors, such as inflation, are ignored
                                              · Return rates override the risk of investment

Table 11.5

Because of the limited information each of the non-time value-based methods give, they are typically used in
conjunction with time value-based capital budgeting methods.

Summary of the Strengths and Weaknesses of the Time Value-Based Capital Budgeting
Methods

Time value-based capital budgeting methods are best used after an initial screening process, when a company
is choosing between few alternatives. They help determine the best of the alternatives that a company should
pursue. Two such methods are net present value and internal rate of return. Their strengths and weaknesses
are presented in Table 11.6 and Table 11.7.
Net present value converts future cash flow dollars into current values to determine if the initial investment is
less than the future returns.
596                                                                               Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions

               Strengths                        Net Present Value

     · Considers the time value                                             Weaknesses
        of money
                                    · Requires a more difficult calculation than non-time value methods
     · Acknowledges higher          · Required return rate is an estimate, thus any changes to this
        risk investments
                                       condition and the impact that has on earnings are unknown
     · Comparable future            · Difficult to compare alternatives that have varying investment
        earnings with today's
        value                          amounts

     · Allows for a selection of
        investment

Table 11.6

Internal rate of return looks at future cash flows as compared to an initial investment to find the rate of return
on investment. The goal is to have an interest rate higher than the predetermined rate of return to consider
investment.

                 Strengths              Internal Rate of Return

     · Considers the time value of                                        Weaknesses
        money
                                    · Does not acknowledge higher risk investments because the focus
     · Easy to compare different-      is on return rates
        sized investments,
        removes dollar bias         · More difficult calculation than non-time value methods, and
                                       outcome may be uncertain if not using a financial calculator or
     · A predetermined rate of         spreadsheet program
        return is not required
                                    · If the time for return on investment is important, IRR will not place
     · Allows for a selection of       more importance on shorter-term investments
        investment

Table 11.7

After a time-value based capital budgeting method is analyzed, a company can be move toward a decision on
an investment opportunity. This is of particular importance when resources are limited.

Before discussing the mechanics of choosing the NPV versus the IRR method for decision-making, we first
need to discuss one cardinal rule of using the NPV or IRR methods to evaluate time-sensitive investments or
asset purchases: If a project or investment has a positive NPV, then it will, by definition, have an IRR that is
above the interest rate used to calculate the NPV.

For example, assume that a company is considering buying a piece of equipment. They determine that it will
cost $30,000 and will save them $10,000 a year in expenses for five years. They have decided that the interest
rate that they will choose to calculate the NPV and to evaluate the purchase IRR is 8%, predicated on current

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions                                                                           597

loan rates available. Based on this sample data, the NPV will be positive $9,927 ($39,927 PV for inflows and
$30,000 PV for the outflows), and the IRR will be 19.86%. Since the calculations require at least an 8% return,
the company would accept the project using either method. We will not spend additional time on the
calculations at this point, since our purpose is to create numbers to analyze. If you want to duplicate the
calculations, you can use a software program such as Excel or a financial calculator.

   CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

   Solar Energy as Capital Investment

   A recent capital investment decision that many company leaders need to make is whether or not to
   invest in solar energy. Solar energy is replacing fossil fuels as a power source, and it provides a low-cost
   energy, reducing overhead costs. The expensive up-front installation costs can deter some businesses
   from making the initial investment.
   Businesses must now choose between an expensive initial capital outlay and the long-term benefits of
   solar power. A capital investment such as this would require an initial screening and preference process
   to determine if the cost savings and future benefits are worth more today than the current capital
   expenditure. If it makes financial sense, they may look to invest in this increasingly popular energy
   source.

Now, we return to our comparison of the NPV and IRR methods. There are typically two situations that we
want to consider. The first involves looking at projects that are not mutually exclusive, meaning we can
consider more than one possibility. If a company is considering non-mutually exclusive opportunities, they will
generally consider all options that have a positive NPV or an IRR that is above the target rate of interest as
favorable options for an investment or asset purchase. In this situation, the NPV and IRR methods will provide
the same accept-or-reject decision. If the company accepts a project or investment under the NPV calculation,
then they will accept it under the IRR method. If they reject it under the NPV calculation, then they will also
reject under the IRR method.

The second situation involves mutually exclusive opportunities. For example, if a company has one computer
system and is considering replacing it, they might look at seven options that have favorable NPVs and IRRs,
even though they only need one computer system. In this case, they would choose only one of the seven
possible options.

In the case of mutually exclusive options, it is possible that the NPV method will select Option A while the IRR
method might choose Option D. The primary reason for this difference is that the NPV method uses dollars
and the IRR uses an interest rate. The two methods may select different options if the company has
investments with major differences in costs in terms of dollars. While both will identify an investment or
purchase that exceeds the required standards of a positive NPV or an interest rate above the target interest
rate, they might lead the company to choose different positive options. When this occurs, the company needs
to consider other conditions, such as qualitative factors, to make their decision. Future cost accounting or
finance courses will cover this content in more detail.
598  Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions

Final Comparison of the Four Capital Budgeting Options

A company will be presented with many alternatives for investment. It is up to management to analyze each
investment's possibilities using capital budgeting methods. The company will want to first screen each
possibility with the payback method and accounting rate of return. The payback method will show the
company how long it will take to recoup their investment, while accounting rate of return gives them the
profitability of the alternatives. This screening will typically get rid of non-viable options and allow the
company to further consider a select few alternatives. A more detailed analysis is found in time-value
methods, such as net present value and internal rate of return. Net present value converts future cash flows
into today's valuation for comparability purposes to see if an initial outlay of cash is worth future earnings. The
internal rate of return determines the minimum expected return on a project given the present value of cash
flow expectations and the initial investment. Analyzing these opportunities, with consideration given to time
value of money, allows a company to make an informed decision on how to make large capital expenditures.

     ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

     Barclays and the LIBOR Scandal

     As discussed in Volkswagen Diesel Emissions Scandal, when a company makes an unethical decision, it
     must adjust its budget for fines and lawsuits. In 2012, Barclays, a British financial services company, was
     caught illegally manipulating LIBOR interest rates. LIBOR sets the interest rate for many types of loans.
     As CNN reported, "LIBOR, which stands for London Interbank Offered Rate, is the rate at which banks
     lend to each other, and is used globally to price financial products, such as mortgages, worth hundreds
     of trillions of dollars."[4]

     While Volkswagen decided to cover the costs related to fines and lawsuits by reducing its capital budget
     for technology and research, Barclays took a different approach. The company chose to "cut or claw back
     of about 450 million pounds ($680 million) of pay from its staff" and from past pay packages "another
     140 million pounds ($212 million)."[5] Instead of reducing other areas of its capital budget, Barclays
     decided to cover its fines and lawsuits by cutting employee compensation.

     The LIBOR scandal involved a number of international banks and rocked the international banking
     community. An independent review of Barclays reported that "if Barclays is to achieve a material
     improvement in its reputation, it will need to continue to make changes to its top levels of pay so as to
     reflect talent and contribution more realistically, and in ways that mean something to the general
     public."[6] Previously, as described by the company website, "Barclays has been a leader in innovation;
     funding the world's first industrial steam railway, naming the UK's first female branch manager and
     introducing the world's first ATM machine."[7] The positive reputation Barclays built over 300 years was
     tarnished by just one scandal, and demonstrates the difficulty of calculating just how much unethical
     behavior will cost a company's reputation.

4 Charles Riley. "Remember the Libor Scandal? Well It's Coming Back to Haunt the Bank of England." CNN. April 10, 2017.
https://money.cnn.com/2017/04/10/investing/bank-of-england-libor-barclays/index.html
5 Steve Slater. "Barclays to Cut Pay by $890 Million over Scandals: Source." Reuters. February 27, 2013. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-
barclays-libor-pay/barclays-to-cut-pay-by-890-million-over-scandals-source-idUSBRE91Q0SD20130227
6 Anthony Salz. Salz Review: An Independent Review of Barclays' Business Practices. April 3, 2018. https://online.wsj.com/public/resources/
documents/SalzReview04032013.pdf
7 "Our History." Barclays. n.d. https://www.banking.barclaysus.com/our-history.html

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions                                                                   599

LINK TO LEARNING

A popular television show, Shark Tank, explores the decision-making process investors use when
considering ownership in a new business. Entrepreneurs will pitch their business concept and current
position to the "sharks," who will evaluate the business using capital budgeting methods, such as
payback period and net present value, to decide whether or not to invest in the entrepreneur's company.
Learn more about Shark Tank's concept and success stories (https://openstax.org/l/50SharkTank) on the
web.
600  Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions

     Key Terms

accounting rate of return (ARR) return on investment considering changes to net income
alternatives options available for investment
annuities due equal installments paid at the beginning of each payment period within the series
annuity series of equal payments made over time
capital investment company's contribution of funds toward long-term assets for further growth; also called

     capital budgeting
cash flow cash receipts and cash disbursements as a result of business activity
cash inflow money received or cost savings from a capital investment
cash outflow money paid or increased cost expenditures from capital investment
compounding earning interest on previous interest earned, along with the interest earned on the original

     investment
discounted cash flow model assigns a value to a business opportunity using time-value measurement tools
discounting process that determines the present value of a single payment or stream of payments to be

     received
future value (FV) value of an investment after a certain period of time
hurdle rate minimum required rate of return on an investment to consider an alternative for further

     evaluation
internal rate of return method (IRR) calculation to determine profitability or growth potential of an

     investment, expressed as a percentage, at the point where NPV equals zero
lump sum one-time payment or repayment of funds at a particular point in time
net present value method (NPV) discounts future cash flows to their present value at the expected rate of

     return, and compares that to the initial investment
non-time value methods analysis that does not consider the comparison value of a dollar today to a dollar

     in the future
operating expenses daily operational costs not associated with the direct selling of products or services
ordinary annuities equal installments paid at the end of each payment period within the series
payback method (PM) calculation of the length of time it takes a company to recoup their initial investment
preference decision process of comparing potential projects that meet screening decision criteria, and will

     rank order of importance, feasibility, and desirability to differentiate among alternatives
present value (PV) future value of an investment expressed in today's value
screening decision process of removing alternatives from the decision-making process that would be less

     desirable to pursue given their inability to meet basic standards
time value of money assertion that the value of a dollar today is worth more than the value of a dollar in the

     future

     Summary

11.1 Describe Capital Investment Decisions and How They Are Applied
  · Capital investment decisions select a project for future business development. These projects typically
      require a large outlay of cash, provide an uncertain return, and tie up resources for an extended period of
      time.
  · Having a large number of alternatives requires a careful budgeting and analysis process. This process
      includes determining capital needs, exploring resource limitations, establishing baseline criteria for

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions  601

      alternatives, evaluating alternatives using screening and preference decisions, and making the decision.
  · Screening decisions help eliminate undesirable alternatives that may waste time and money. Preference

      decisions rank alternatives emerging from the screening process to help make the final decision. Both
      decision avenues use capital budgeting methods to select between alternatives.

11.2 Evaluate the Payback and Accounting Rate of Return in Capital Investment Decisions
  · The payback method determines how long it will take a company to recoup their investment. Annual cash
      flows are compared to the initial investment but the time value of money is not considered and cashflows
      beyond the payback period are ignored.
  · The accounting rate of return considers incremental net income as it compares to the initial investment.
      Time value of money is not considered with this method.
  · Incremental net income determines the net income expected if the company accepts the investment
      opportunity, as opposed to not investing. Incremental net income is the difference between incremental
      revenues and incremental expenses.

11.3 Explain the Time Value of Money and Calculate Present and Future Values of Lump Sums and
Annuities

  · A dollar is worth more today than it will be in the future. This is due to many reasons including the power
      of investment in today's economy, market inflation, and the ability to use the money in the present to
      make more money in the future, with interest.

  · Present value expresses the future value of a dollar in today's (present) value. Present value tables,
      showing the present value factor intersection of periods and interest rate, are used to multiply by the final
      payout amount to compute today's value.

  · The future value shows what the value of an investment will be after a certain period of time. Future value
      tables, showing the future value factor intersection of periods and interest rate, are used to multiply by
      the initial investment amount to compute future value.

  · A lump sum is a one-time payment after a certain period of time, whereas an ordinary annuity involves
      equal installments in a series of payments over time. A business can use lump sum or ordinary annuity
      calculations for present value and future value calculations.

11.4 Use Discounted Cash Flow Models to Make Capital Investment Decisions
  · The discounted cash flow model assigns values to a project's alternatives using time value of money and
      discounts future rates back to present value. Two measurement tools are used in discounted cash flows:
      net present value and internal rate of return.
  · Net present value considers an expected rate of return, converts future cash flows into present value, and
      compares that to the initial investment cost. If the outcome is positive, the company would look to invest
      in the project.
  · Internal rate of return shows the profitability of an investment, where NPV equals zero. If the
      corresponding interest rate exceeds the expected rate of return, the company would invest in the project.

11.5 Compare and Contrast Non-Time Value-Based Methods and Time Value-Based Methods in Capital
Investment Decisions

  · The payback method uses a simple calculation, removes unviable alternatives quickly, and considers
      investment risk. However, it disregards the time value of money, ignores profitability, and does not
      consider cash flows after recouping the investment.

  · The accounting rate of return uses a simple calculation, considers profitability, and removes unviable
      options quickly. However, it disregards the time value of money, values return rates more than risk, and
      ignores external influential factors.
602                                                                               Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions

· Net present value considers the time value of money, ranks higher risk investments, and compares future
   earnings in today's value. However, it cannot easily compare dissimilar investment opportunities, it uses a
   more difficult calculation, and it has limitations with the estimation of an expected rate of return.

· Internal rate of return considers the time value of money, removes the dollar bias, and leads a company
   to a decision, unlike non-time value methods. However, it has a bias toward return rates instead of higher
   risk investment consideration, it is a more difficult calculation, and it does not consider the time it will take
   to recoup an investment.

     Multiple Choice

1. 11.1 Capital investment decisions often involve all of the following except ________.
    A. qualitative factors or considerations
    B. short periods of time
    C. large amounts of money
    D. risk

2. 11.1 Preference decisions compare potential projects that meet screening decision criteria and will be
ranked in their preference order to differentiate between alternatives with respect to all of the following
characteristics except ________.

    A. political prominence
    B. feasibility
    C. desirability
    D. importance

3. 11.1 The third step for making a capital investment decision is to establish baseline criteria for
alternatives. Which of the following would not be an acceptable baseline criterion?

    A. payback method
    B. accounting rate of return
    C. internal rate of return
    D. inventory turnover

4. 11.3 You are explaining time value of money factors to your friend. Which factor would you explain as
being larger?

    A. The future value of $1 for 12 periods at 6% is larger.
    B. The present value of $1 for 12 periods at 6% is larger.
    C. Neither one is larger because they are equal.
    D. There is not enough information given to answer this question.

5. 11.3 If you are saving the same amount each month in order to buy a new sports car when the new
models are released, which of the following will help you determine the savings needed?

    A. future value of one dollar ($1)
    B. present value of one dollar ($1)
    C. future value of an ordinary annuity
    D. present value of an ordinary annuity

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions                                                                          603

6. 11.3 You want to invest $8,000 at an annual interest rate of 8% that compounds annually for 12 years.
Which table will help you determine the value of your account at the end of 12 years?

    A. future value of one dollar ($1)
    B. present value of one dollar ($1)
    C. future value of an ordinary annuity
    D. present value of an ordinary annuity

7. 11.3 Using the information provided, what transaction represents the best application of the present
value of an annuity due of $1?

    A. Falcon Products leases an office building for 8 years with annual lease payments of $100,000 to be
          made at the beginning of each year.

    B. Compass, Inc., signs a note of $32,000, which requires the company to pay back the principal plus
          interest in four years.

    C. Bahwat Company plans to deposit a lump sum of $100,000 for the construction of a solar farm in 4
          years.

    D. NYC Industries leases a car for 4 yearly annual lease payments of $12,000, where payments are made
          at the end of each year.

8. 11.3 Grummet Company is acquiring a new wood lathe with a cash purchase price of $80,000. The Wood
Master Industries (the manufacturer) has agreed to accept $23,500 at the end of each of the next 4 years.
Based on this deal, how much interest will Grummet pay over the life of the loan?

    A. $94,000
    B. $80,000
    C. $23,500
    D. $14,000

9. 11.3 The process that determines the present value of a single payment or stream of payments to be
received is ________.

    A. compounding
    B. discounting
    C. annuity
    D. lump-sum

10.     11.3 The process of reinvesting interest earned to generate additional earnings over time is ________.
    A.  compounding
    B.  discounting
    C.  annuity
    D.  lump-sum

11.     11.4 The NPV method assumes that cash inflows associated with a particular investment occur when?
    A.  only at the time of the initial investment
    B.  only at the end of the year
    C.  only at the beginning of the year
    D.  at any of these times
604                                                                               Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions

12. 11.4 Which of the following does not assign a value to a business opportunity using time-value
measurement tools?

    A. internal rate of return (IRR) method
    B. net present value (NPV)
    C. discounted cash flow model
    D. payback period method

13. 11.4 Which of the following discounts future cash flows to their present value at the expected rate of
return, and compares that to the initial investment?

    A. internal rate of return (IRR) method
    B. net present value (NPV)
    C. discounted cash flow model
    D. future value method

14. 11.4 This calculation determines profitability or growth potential of an investment, expressed as a
percentage, at the point where NPV equals zero

    A. internal rate of return (IRR) method
    B. net present value (NPV)
    C. discounted cash flow model
    D. future value method

15.     11.5 The IRR method assumes that cash flows are reinvested at ________.
    A.  the internal rate of return
    B.  the company's discount rate
    C.  the lower of the company's discount rate or internal rate of return
    D.  an average of the internal rate of return and the discount rate

16. 11.5 When using the NPV method for a particular invenstment deicision, if the present value of all cash
inflows is greater than the present value of all cash outflows, then ________.

    A. the discount rate used was too high
    B. the investment provides an actual rate of return greater than the discount rate
    C. the investment provides an actual rate of return equal to the discount rate
    D. the discount rate is too low

     Questions

1. 11.1 What are the steps involved in the process for capital decision-making?
2. 11.1 Why does a company evaluate both the money allocated to a project and the time allocated to the
project?
3. 11.1 What is the next thing a company needs to do after it establishes investment criteria?
4. 11.1 What is the screening decision?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions  605

5. 11.1 Your supervisor is on the company's capital investment decision team that is to decide on
alternatives for the acquisition of a new computer system for the company. The supervisor says, "The book
value of the existing computer system for the firm that we are considering replacing is nothing but an
accounting amount and as such is irrelevant in the capital expenditure analysis." Does this reasoning make
sense? Why or why not?

6. 11.1 Ekon owns a small tow-truck business that responds to state patrol requests to tow cars involved in
wrecks, as well as to private business requests from customers at various auto repair shops and individuals
with stalled autos. Ekon's business is open 24/7 for 365 days a year. He is starting to see too many repairs on
his three trucks, which either means that he loses business or must divert a truck from another area. He is now
trying to consider whether it is best to continue use of the current trucks or whether he needs to invest some
money in new trucks.
Using the steps for the process of capital decision-making, create an outline with sub-steps that include
questions Ekon can use to guide his investigation or considerations of buying new trucks.

7. 11.2 What is the payback method used to determine?

8. 11.2 What are one advantage and one disadvantage of the payback method?

9. 11.2 What are one advantage and one disadvantage of the accounting rate of return method?

10. 11.2 What is the equation to calculate the payback period?

11. 11.2 What is the equation to calculate the accounting rate of return?

12. 11.3 What is future value and what is one example where it might be used?

13. 11.3 Why do businesses consider time value of money before making an investment decision?

14. 11.3 What determines the anticipated interest rate payout for an investment?

15. 11.3 To calculate present value of a lump sum, which table would be used?

16. 11.3 What is the definition of present value?

17. 11.4 What is the difference between the discount rate used for net present value and the internal rate
of return methods?

18. 11.4 Briefly explain how NPV is computed and interpreted.

19. 11.4 What is the basic benefit of using IRR?

20. 11.4 How is the IRR determined if there are uneven cash flows?

21. 11.5 A fellow student studying managerial accounting says, "The net present value (NPV) weighs early
receipts of cash much more heavily than more distant receipts of cash." Do you agree or disagree? Why?

22. 11.5 What are the strengths and weaknesses of NPV?

23. 11.5 What are the strengths and weaknesses of IRR?

24. 11.5 How does the size of the initial investment affect the internal rate of return on the net present
value models?
606  Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions

     Exercise Set A

EA1. 11.1 Bob's Auto Repair has determined that it needs new lift equipment to acquire more business
opportunities. However, one or more alternatives meet or exceed the minimum expectations Bob has for the
new lift equipment. As a result, what type of decision should Bob make for his company?

EA2. 11.1 In practice, external factors can impact a capital investment. Give a current external factor that
may currently impact or cause instability of capital spending either here or abroad.

EA3. 11.2 If a copy center is considering the purchase of a new copy machine with an initial investment cost
of $150,000 and the center expects an annual net cash flow of $20,000 per year, what is the payback period?

EA4. 11.2 Assume a company is going to make an investment of $450,000 in a machine and the following
are the cash flows that two different products would bring in years one through four. Which of the two options
would you choose based on the payback method?

EA5. 11.2 If a garden center is considering the purchase of a new tractor with an initial investment cost of
$120,000, and the center expects a return of $30,000 in year one, $20,000 in years two and three, $15,000 in
years four and five, and $10,000 in year six and beyond, what is the payback period?

EA6. 11.2 The management of Kawneer North America is considering investing in a new facility and the
following cash flows are expected to result from the investment:

    A. What is the payback period of this uneven cash flow?
    B. Does your answer change if year 10's cash inflow changes to $500,000?
EA7. 11.2 A mini-mart needs a new freezer and the initial investment will cost $300,000. Incremental
revenues, including cost savings, are $200,000, and incremental expenses, including depreciation, are
$125,000. There is no salvage value. What is the accounting rate of return (ARR)?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions                                                              607

EA8.     11.3 You put $250 in the bank for 5 years at 12%.
    A.  If interest is added at the end of the year, how much will you have in the bank after one year? Calculate
        the amount you will have in the bank at the end of year two and continue to calculate all the way to the
    B.  end of the fifth year.
        Use the future value of $1 table in Appendix B and verify that your answer is correct.

EA9. 11.3 If you invest $12,000 today, how much will you have in (for further instructions on future value in
Excel, see Appendix C):

    A. 10 years at 9%
    B. 8 years at 12%
    C. 14 years at 15%
    D. 19 years at 18%

EA10. 11.3 You have been depositing money into an account yearly based on the following investment
amounts, rates and times, what is the value of that investment account at the end of that period?

EA11. 11.3 How much would you invest today in order to receive $30,000 in each of the following (for
further instructions on present value in Excel, see Appendix C):

    A. 10 years at 9%
    B. 8 years at 12%
    C. 14 years at 15%
    D. 19 years at 18%
EA12. 11.3 Your friend has a trust fund that will pay her the following amounts at the given interest rate for
the given number of years. Calculate the current (present) value of your friend's trust fund payments. For
further instructions on future value in Excel, see Appendix C.

EA13. 11.3 Julio Company is considering the purchase of a new bubble packaging machine. If the machine
will provide $20,000 annual savings for 10 years and can be sold for $50,000 at the end of the period, what is
the present value of the machine investment at a 9% interest rate with savings realized at year end?
EA14. 11.3 How much must be invested now to receive $30,000 for 10 years if the first $30,000 is received
one year from now and the rate is 8%?
EA15. 11.4 Project A costs $5,000 and will generate annual after-tax net cash inflows of $1,800 for five years.
What is the NPV using 8% as the discount rate?
608                                                                               Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions

EA16. 11.4 Project B cost $5,000 and will generate after-tax net cash inflows of $500 in year one, $1,200 in
year two, $2,000 in year three, $2,500 in year four, and $2,000 in year five. What is the NPV using 8% as the
discount rate? For further instructions on net present value in Excel, see Appendix C.

EA17. 11.4 Gardner Denver Company is considering the purchase of a new piece of factory equipment that
will cost $420,000 and will generate $95,000 per year for 5 years. Calculate the IRR for this piece of equipment.
For further instructions on internal rate of return in Excel, see Appendix C.

EA18. 11.4 Consolidated Aluminum is considering the purchase of a new machine that will cost $308,000
and provide the following cash flows over the next five years: $88,000, 92,000, $91,000, $72,000, and $71,000.
Calculate the IRR for this piece of equipment. For further instructions on internal rate of return in Excel, see
Appendix C.

EA19. 11.4 Redbird Company is considering a project with an initial investment of $265,000 in new
equipment that will yield annual net cash flows of $45,800 each year over its seven-year life. The company's
minimum required rate of return is 8%. What is the internal rate of return? Should Redbird accept the project
based on IRR?

EA20. 11.5 Towson Industries is considering an investment of $256,950 that is expected to generate returns
of $90,000 per year for each of the next four years. What is the investment's internal rate of return?

EA21. 11.5 Cinemar Productions bought a piece of equipment for $55,898 that will last for 5 years. The
equipment will generate net operating cash flows of $14,000 per year and will have no salvage value at the end
of its life. What is the internal rate of return?

  B Exercise Set B

EB1. 11.1 Margo's Memories, a company that specializes in photography and creating family and group
photo portfolios, has 50 stores in major malls around the U.S. The company is considering an online business,
which will require a substantial investment in web design, security, payment processing, and technology in
order to launch successfully. What potential advantages or disadvantages will be difficult to quantify from a
capital investment standpoint?

EB2. 11.1 Boxer Production, Inc., is in the process of considering a flexible manufacturing system that will
help the company react more swiftly to customer needs. The controller, Mick Morrell, estimated that the
system will have a 10-year life and a required return of 10% with a net present value of negative $500,000.
Nevertheless, he acknowledges that he did not quantify the potential sales increases that might result from
this improvement on the issue of on-time delivery, because it was too difficult to quantify.

If there is a general agreement that qualitative factors may offer an additional net cash flow of $150,000 per
year, how should Boxer proceed with this investment?

EB3. 11.2 A restaurant is considering the purchase of new tables and chairs for their dining room with an
initial investment cost of $515,000, and the restaurant expects an annual net cash flow of $103,000 per year.
What is the payback period?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions                                   609

EB4. 11.2 Assume a company is going to make an investment in a machine of $825,000 and the following
are the cash flows that two different products would bring. Which of the two options would you choose based
on the payback method?

EB5. 11.2 A grocery store is considering the purchase of a new refrigeration unit with an initial investment
of $412,000, and the store expects a return of $100,000 in year one, $72,000 in years two and three, $65,000 in
years four and five, and $38,000 in year six and beyond, what is the payback period?

EB6. 11.2 The management of Ryland International is considering investing in a new facility and the
following cash flows are expected to result from the investment:

A. What is the payback period of this uneven cash flow?
B. Does your answer change if year 6's cash inflow changes to $920,000?

EB7. 11.2 An auto repair company needs a new machine that will check for defective sensors. The machine
has an initial investment of $224,000. Incremental revenues, including cost savings, are $120,000, and
incremental expenses, including depreciation, are $50,000. There is no salvage value. What is the accounting
rate of return (ARR)?

EB8.     11.3 You put $600 in the bank for 3 years at 15%.
    A.  If interest is added at the end of the year, how much will you have in the bank after one year? Calculate
        the amount you will have in the bank at the end of year two and continue to calculate all the way to the
    B.  end of the third year.
        Use the future value of $1 table in Appendix B and verify that your answer is correct.

EB9. 11.3 If you invest $15,000 today, how much will you have in (for further instructions on future value in
Excel, see Appendix C):

    A. 20 years at 22%
    B. 12 years at 10%
    C. 5 years at 14%
    D. 2 years at 7%
610                                                                               Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions

EB10. 11.3 You have been depositing money into an account yearly based on the following investment
amounts, rates and times. What is the value of that investment account at the end of that period?

EB11. 11.3 How much would you invest today in order to receive $30,000 in each of the following (for
further instructions on present value in Excel, see Appendix C):

    A. 20 years at 22%
    B. 12 years at 10%
    C. 5 years at 14%
    D. 2 years at 7%
EB12. 11.3 Your friend has a trust fund that will pay her the following amounts at the given interest rate for
the given number of years. Calculate the current (present) value of your friend's trust fund payments. For
further instructions on present value in Excel, see Appendix C.

EB13. 11.3 Conestoga Plumbing plans to invest in a new pump that is anticipated to provide annual savings
for 10 years of $50,000. The pump can be sold at the end of the period for $100,000. What is the present value
of the investment in the pump at a 9% interest rate given that savings are realized at year end?
EB14. 11.3 How much must be invested now to receive $50,000 for 8 years if the first $50,000 is received in
one year and the rate is 10%?
EB15. 11.4 Project X costs $10,000 and will generate annual net cash inflows of $4,800 for five years. What is
the NPV using 8% as the discount rate?
EB16. 11.4 Project Y cost $8,000 and will generate net cash inflows of $1,500 in year one, $2,000 in year two,
$2,500 in year three, $3,000 in year four and $2,000 in year five. What is the NPV using 8% as the discount
rate?
EB17. 11.4 Caduceus Company is considering the purchase of a new piece of factory equipment that will
cost $565,000 and will generate $135,000 per year for 5 years. Calculate the IRR for this piece of equipment. For
further instructions on internal rate of return in Excel, see Appendix C.
EB18. 11.4 Garnette Corp is considering the purchase of a new machine that will cost $342,000 and provide
the following cash flows over the next five years: $99,000, $88,000, $92,000, $87,000, and $72,000. Calculate the
IRR for this piece of equipment. For further instructions on internal rate of return in Excel, see Appendix C.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions                                                                        611

EB19. 11.4 Wallace Company is considering two projects. Their required rate of return is 10%.

                                                 Project A           Project B

Initial investment                      $170,000            $48,000

Annual cash flows                       $41,352             $12,022

Life of the project                     6 years             5 years

Which of the two projects, A or B, is better in terms of internal rate of return?

EB20. 11.5 Taos Productions bought a piece of equipment for $79,860 that will last for 5 years. The
equipment will generate net operating cash flows of $20,000 per year and will have no salvage value at the end
of its life. What is the internal rate of return?

        Problem Set A

PA1. 11.2 Your company is planning to purchase a new log splitter for its lawn and garden business. The
new splitter has an initial investment of $180,000. It is expected to generate $25,000 of annual cash flows,
provide incremental cash revenues of $150,000, and incur incremental cash expenses of $100,000 annually.

What is the payback period and accounting rate of return (ARR)?

PA2. 11.2 Jasmine Manufacturing is considering a project that will require an initial investment of $52,000
and is expected to generate future cash flows of $10,000 for years 1 through 3, $8,000 for years 4 and 5, and
$2,000 for years 6 through 10. What is the payback period for this project?

PA3.     11.3 Use the tables in Appendix B to answer the following questions.
    A.  If you would like to accumulate $2,500 over the next 4 years when the interest rate is 15%, how much
        do you need to deposit in the account?
    B.  If you place $6,200 in a savings account, how much will you have at the end of 7 years with a 12%
        interest rate?
    C.  You invest $8,000 per year for 10 years at 12% interest, how much will you have at the end of 10 years?
    D.  You win the lottery and can either receive $750,000 as a lump sum or $50,000 per year for 20 years.
        Assuming you can earn 8% interest, which do you recommend and why?

PA4. 11.3 Ralston Consulting, Inc., has a $25,000 overdue debt with Supplier No. 1. The company is low on
cash, with only $7,000 in the checking account and does not want to borrow any more cash. Supplier No. 1
agrees to settle the account in one of two ways:
Option 1: Pay $7,000 now and $23,750 when some large projects are finished, two years from today.
Option 2: Pay $35,000 three years from today, when even larger projects are finished.
Assuming that the only factor in the decision is the cost of money (8%), which option should Ralston choose?
612                                                                               Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions

PA5. 11.4 Falkland, Inc., is considering the purchase of a patent that has a cost of $50,000 and an estimated
revenue producing life of 4 years. Falkland has a cost of capital of 8%. The patent is expected to generate the
following amounts of annual income and cash flows:

    A. What is the NPV of the investment?
    B. What happens if the required rate of return increases?

PA6. 11.4 There are two projects under consideration by the Rainbow factory. Each of the projects will
require an initial investment of $35,000 and is expected to generate the following cash flows:

If the discount rate is 12%, compute the NPV of each project.

PA7. 11.4 There are two projects under consideration by the Rainbow factory. Each of the projects will
require an initial investment of $35,000 and is expected to generate the following cash flows:

Use the information from the previous exercise to calculate the internal rate of return on both projects and
make a recommendation on which one to accept. For further instructions on internal rate of return in Excel,
see Appendix C.

PA8. 11.4 Pompeii's Pizza has a delivery car that it uses for pizza deliveries. The transmission needs to be
replaced and there are several other repairs that need to be done. The car is nearing the end of its life, so the
options are to either overhaul the car or replace it with a new car. Pompeii's has put together the following
budgetary items:

If Pompeii's replaces the transmission of the pizza delivery vehicle, they expect to be able to use the vehicle for
another 5 years. If they sell the old vehicle and purchase a new vehicle, they will use that vehicle for 5 years
and then trade it in for another new pizza delivery vehicle. If they trade for the new delivery vehicle, their
operating expenses will decrease because the new vehicle is more gas efficient and the maintenance on a new
car is less. This project is analyzed using a discount rate of 12%. What should Pompeii's do?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions                                                                613

PA9. 11.4 Pitt Company is considering two alternative investments. The company requires a 12% return
from its investments. Neither option has a salvage value.

Compute the IRR for both projects and recommend one of them. For further instructions on internal rate of
return in Excel, see Appendix C.
PA10. 11.5 The Ham and Egg Restaurant is considering an investment in a new oven that has a cost of
$60,000, with annual net cash flows of $9,950 for 8 years. The required rate of return is 6%. Compute the net
present value of this investment to determine whether or not you would recommend that Ham and Egg invest
in this oven.
PA11. 11.5 Gallant Sports is considering the purchase of a new rock-climbing facility. The company
estimates that the construction will require an initial outlay of $350,000. Other cash flows are estimated as
follows:

Assuming the company limits its analysis to four years due to economic uncertainties, determine the net
present value of the rock-climbing facility. Should the company develop the facility if the required rate of
return is 6%?

  B Problem Set B

PB1. 11.2 A bookstore is planning to purchase an automated inventory/remote marketing system, which
includes an upgrade to a more sophisticated cash register system. The package has an initial investment cost
of $360,000. It is expected to generate $144,000 of annual cash flows, reduce costs and provide incremental
cash revenues of $326,000, and incur incremental cash expenses of $200,000 annually.
What is the payback period and accounting rate of return (ARR)?
PB2. 11.2 Markoff Products is considering two competing projects, but only one will be selected. Project A
requires an initial investment of $42,000 and is expected to generate future cash flows of $6,000 for each of the
next 50 years. Project B requires an initial investment of $210,000 and will generate $30,000 for each of the
next 10 years. If Markoff requires a payback of 8 years or less, which project should it select based on payback
periods?
614                                                                               Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions

PB3.     11.3 Use the tables in Appendix B to answer the following questions.
    A.  If you would like to accumulate $4,200 over the next 6 years when the interest rate is 8%, how much do
    B.  you need to deposit in the account?
    C.  If you place $8,700 in a savings account, how much will you have at the end of 12 years with an interest
    D.  rate of 8%?
        You invest $2,000 per year, at the end of the year, for 20 years at 10% interest. How much will you have
        at the end of 20 years?
        You win the lottery and can either receive $500,000 as a lump sum or $60,000 per year for 20 years.
        Assuming you can earn 3% interest, which do you recommend and why?

PB4. 11.3 Chang Consulting, Inc., has a $15,000 overdue debt with Supplier No. 1. The company is low on
cash, with only $4,000 in the checking account and does not want to borrow any more cash. Supplier No. 1
agrees to settle the account in one of two ways:
Option 1: Pay $4,000 now and $18,750 when some large projects are finished, two years from today.
Option 2: Pay $25,000 three years from today, when even larger projects are finished.
Assuming that the only factor in the decision is the cost of money (8%), which option should Clary choose?

PB5. 11.4 Mason, Inc., is considering the purchase of a patent that has a cost of $85,000 and an estimated
revenue producing life of 4 years. Mason has a required rate of return that is 12% and a cost of capital of 11%.
The patent is expected to generate the following amounts of annual income and cash flows:

    A. What is the NPV of the investment?
    B. What happens if the required rate of return increases?

PB6. 11.4 There are two projects under consideration by the Rainbow factory. Each of the projects will
require an initial investment or $28,000 and is expected to generate the following cash flows:

If the discount rate is 5% compute the NPV of each project and make a recommendation of the project to be
chosen.

PB7. 11.4 Use the information from the previous exercise to calculate the Internal Rate of Return on both
projects and make a recommendation regarding which one to accept.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions  615

PB8. 11.4 D&M Pizza has a delivery car that is uses for pizza deliveries. The transmission needs to be
replaced, and there are several other repairs that need to be done. The car is nearing the end of its life, so the
options are to either overhaul the car or replace it with a new car. D&M's has put together the following
budgetary items:

If D&M replaces the transmission of the pizza delivery vehicle, they expect to be able to use the vehicle for
another 5 years. If they purchase a new vehicle, they will sell the existing one and use the new vehicle for 5
years and then trade it in for another new pizza delivery vehicle. If they trade for the new delivery vehicle, their
operating expenses will decrease because the new vehicle is more gas efficient. This project is analyzed using
a discount rate of 15%. What should D&M do?

PB9. 11.4 Joliet Company is considering two alternative investments. The company requires an 18% return
from its investments.

Compute the IRR for both Projects and recommend one of them. For further instructions on internal rate of
return in Excel, see Appendix C.
PB10. 11.5 Bouvier Restaurant is considering an investment in a grill that costs $140,000, and will produce
annual net cash flows of $21,950 for 8 years. The required rate of return is 6%.
Compute the net present value of this investment to determine whether Bouvier should invest in the grill.

     Thought Provokers

TP1. 11.1 What is the benefit(s) of the accountant's involvement in the capital investment decision?
616                                                                               Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions

TP2. 11.1 Austin's cell phone manufacturer wants to upgrade their product mix to encompass an exciting
new feature on their cell phone. This would require a new high-tech machine. You are excited about his new
project and are recommending the purchase to your board of directors. Here is the information you have
compiled in order to complete this recommendation:

According to the information, the project will last 10 years and require an initial investment of $800,000,
depreciated with straight-line over the life of the project until the final value is zero. The firm's tax rate is 30%
and the required rate of return is 12%. You believe that the variable cost and sales volume may be as much as
10% higher or lower than the initial estimate. Your boss understands the risks but asks you to explain the
alternatives in a brief memo to the board. Write a memo to the Board of Directors objectively weighing out the
pros and cons of this project and make your recommendation(s).

TP3. 11.3 Would you rather have $7,500 today or at the end of 20 years after it has been invested at 15%?
Explain your answer.

The following are independent situations. For each capital budgeting project, indicate whether management
should accept or reject the project and list a brief reason why.

TP4. 11.4 Midas Corp. evaluated a potential investment and determined the NPV to be zero. Midas Corp.'s
required rate of return is 9.1% and its cost of capital is 6.4%.

TP5. 11.4 Giorgio Co. is looking at an investment project with an internal rate of return of 10.8%. The initial
outlay for the investment is $90,000. The hurdle rate or minimum acceptable rate of return is 10.2%.

TP6. 11.4 Dinaro Inc. is looking at an investment project that has an NPV of ($5,000). The hurdle rate is 8%.

TP7. 11.4 You begin a new job at Cabrera Medical Supplies. The company is considering a new accounting
system, with an initial investment of about half a million dollars for new software and hardware. You are
excited for the opportunity to apply your managerial accounting skills regarding screening and preference
methods to decide on the best system for the company. Your boss is a little old-school, and when you mention
some of the things you learned in managerial accounting, he says, "Discounted cash flow methods are not the
only way to approach this. I have more of a gut reaction approach that blows most managers out of the water
when they become absorbed by discounted cash flow methods (DCF)."

How would you react and what would you discuss with your boss?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions  617

TP8. 11.5 Fenton, Inc., has established a new strategic plan that calls for new capital investment. The
company has a 9.8% required rate of return and an 8.3% cost of capital. Fenton currently has a return of 10%
on its other investments. The proposed new investments have equal annual cash inflows expected.
Management used a screening procedure of calculating a payback period for potential investments and
annual cash flows, and the IRR for the 7 possible investments are displayed in image. Each investment has a
6-year expected useful life and no salvage value.

A. Identify which project(s) is/are unacceptable and briefly state the conceptual justification as to why
      each of your choices is unacceptable.

B. Assume Fenton has $330,000 available to spend. Which remaining projects should Fenton invest in and
      in what order?

C. If Fenton was not limited to a spending amount, should they invest in all of the projects given the
      company is evaluated using return on investment?
618                                                                               Chapter 11 Capital Budgeting Decisions

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
    12

              Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures

Figure 12.1 Clean Room. A dorm room tidied up by Passing Inspection Cleaning and Organizing. (credit:
modification of "170203-A-IE537-004" by U.S. Army Corp of Engineers's photostream/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

 Chapter Outline

  12.1 Explain the Importance of Performance Measurement
  12.2 Identify the Characteristics of an Effective Performance Measure
  12.3 Evaluate an Operating Segment or a Project Using Return on Investment, Residual Income, and

       Economic Value Added
  12.4 Describe the Balanced Scorecard and Explain How It Is Used

      Why It Matters

   A friend comes to you in a panic. His parents are coming to visit, and his apartment is a complete mess.
   Although he and his roommates frequently say they should clean, now the apartment has gotten so messy
   that they don't even know where to begin. He knows your place always looks clean and orderly, so he is
   seeking your help. You offer to help your friend, and, in the process, come up with a business idea.
   To address the needs of students like your friend, you create a company--Passing Inspection Cleaning and
   Organizing--that will clean and/or organize dorm rooms and apartments. You set up a list of ten standard
   cleaning tasks that will be performed for a flat fee, and put together a list of à la carte services, such as
   laundry, closet organization, and refrigerator cleaning. Four students sign on with you as employees. Because
   it is important for your company to have a good reputation, you want to motivate your employees to perform
   their tasks to a high standard. You also want your employees to solicit additional business whenever possible
   by handing out flyers or business cards to nearby rooms and apartments when on a cleaning assignment.
   How can you motivate your employees to perform to your standards so that your company goals are met? Will
   an hourly wage be sufficient? Should you pay per task or per job? What motivation will they have to sell your
620  Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures

company's services to others? How will you know if they are performing the tasks in the manner you set forth?
To answer these questions, you will need to be aware of the goals of your company, such as increasing the
number of clients, as well as the goals of your employees, such as receiving raises, bonuses, or promotions.
Armed with this knowledge, you will be able to design relevant evaluation measures and tie those measures to
appropriate performance rewards so that both your goals and the goals of your employees are met. This same
need--to measure the performance of a business and its employees so that each party's goals are met--is an
issue that affects all businesses, regardless of size or type.

 12.1 Explain the Importance of Performance Measurement

As you learned in Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization, as a company grows, it will often
decentralize to better control operations and therefore improve decision-making. Remember, a decentralized
organization is one in which the decision-making is spread among various managers throughout the
organization and does not solely rest with the chief executive officer (CEO). However, with this dispersion of
decision-making comes an even greater need to monitor the results of the decisions made by the many
managers at the various levels of the organization to ensure that the overall goals of the organization are still
being met.

   ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

   Ethical Evaluation of Performance Measures

   To evaluate whether decisions made by management are both effective and ethical, performance is
   measured through responsibility accounting. This is a double-layer ethical analysis that requires some
   thought to establish and implement, as the evaluation system must also operate in an ethical fashion,
   just as the decision-making process itself does. In most organizations, the overall results of choices made
   by management, not just the resulting profit, need to be examined to determine whether or not the
   decisions are ethical.

   When an organization's customers and other stakeholders are happy, and the corporate assets are in
   good condition, these are indicators that the customers, stakeholders, and assets are being treated
   ethically. Evaluation of customer and stakeholder satisfaction should come directly from the customer,
   such as through surveys or other direct questionnaires. Proper treatment of organizational assets can be
   determined by viewing the physical condition of such assets, or the loss rates and productivity of
   equipment. Customer satisfaction and positive results in the utilization of corporate assets typically
   indicate ethical decision-making and behavior, while negative results typically indicate the opposite. An
   organization with a satisfied group of stakeholders and customers, as well as assets that operate
   efficiently, is often more profitable in the long term.

Managerial accountants therefore must design a framework of responsibility accounting in which the
evaluation system is based on criteria for which a manager is responsible. The framework should be
structured to encourage managers to make decisions that will meet the goals of the company as well as their
own professional goals. In your study of managerial accounting, you have learned about company goals such
as increasing market share, increasing revenues, decreasing costs, and decreasing defects. Managers and
employees have their own goals. These goals can be work related such as promotions or awards, or they can
be more personal such as receiving raises, receiving bonuses, the privilege of telecommuting, or shares of

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures  621

company stock. This aligning of goals between a corporation's strategy and a manager's personal goals is
known as goal congruence. Managers should make the best decisions for the benefit of the corporation, and
the best way to motivate a manager to make those decisions is to link a reward system to performance results.
To accomplish this, a business establishes performance evaluation measures that align the decisions made by
management with the goals of the corporation and the professional goals of the manager.

Fundamentals of Performance Measurement

Performance measurement is used to motivate managers to make decisions that benefit the corporation and
themselves. Therefore, the key to good performance measurement techniques is to set goals that are realistic
and that incorporate decisions over which the manager has control. Then, the company can evaluate the
manager based on controllable factors, which are the components of the organization for which the
manager is responsible and that the manager can control, such as revenues, costs and procurement of long-
term assets, and other possible factors. Recall that in Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization, you
learned about responsibility centers, which are a means by which an organization can be divided based on
factors that the manager can control. This makes it easier to align the goals of the manager with those of the
organization and to design effective performance measures. The four types of responsibility centers are
revenue centers, cost centers, profit centers, and investment centers.

In a revenue center, the manager has control over the revenues that are generated for the corporation but
not over the costs of the organization. For example, the reservations department of an airline is a revenue
center because the reservationists can control revenues by selling customers upgrades such as meals or first-
class seating, by selling trip insurance, or by trying to keep customers from going to another airline. However,
reservationists cannot control the costs of the flights the airline is offering and reserving because the
reservation department cannot control the cost of the planes, airport space rental, or jet fuel. Therefore, the
manager of the reservation department should have performance evaluations measures closely related to
revenue generation.

In a cost center, the manager has control over costs but not over revenues. An example of a cost center would
be the accounting department of a grocery store chain. The manager can control the types of people hired,
the wages that are paid, and the hours that are worked within that department, and each of these costs
contributes to the total cost of the department. However, the manager of the accounting department has no
control over the generation of revenues.

In a profit center, the manager has control over both revenues and costs. An example would be a single
location of Best Buy. The manager at that store has control over both revenues and costs; therefore, one
component of evaluation for that manager will be store profits.

An investment center is a component of a business for which the manager has control over revenues, costs,
and capital assets. This means the manager not only can make decisions regarding generating revenues and
controlling costs but also has authority to make decisions regarding assets, such as buying new machines,
expanding facilities, or selling old assets. With each of these types of centers, designing the appropriate
performance measures begins with evaluating management based on which business areas they oversee.

Using the previous revenue center example, the manager of the reservation department should be evaluated
on how well his team generates revenues. The proper incentives will motivate the team to perform better at
their jobs. Evaluating a manager on the outcome of decisions over which he or she has no control, or
uncontrollable factors, will be demotivating and does not promote goal congruence between the
organization and the manager. The reservations manager has no control over fuel costs, plane maintenance
622  Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures

costs, or pilot salaries. Thus, it would not be logical to evaluate the manager on flight costs.
A good performance measurement system is one that utilizes appropriate performance measures, which
are performance metrics used to evaluate a specific attribute of a manager's role, to evaluate management in
a way that will link the goals of the corporation with those of the manager. A metric is simply a means to
measure something. For example, high school grade point average is a metric used by colleges when
considering admission of prospective students, as it is considered a measure of prior academic success. In the
business environment, individuals who design the performance measurement system must have extensive
knowledge of the corporate strategic plan and the overall goals set by the organization, and a clear
understanding of the job descriptions, responsibilities of each manager, and trends in rewards and
compensation.

   THINK IT THROUGH

   Motivating Dental Industry Employees

   As a dentist and owner of your own practice, you are considering ways to both reward and motivate your
   staff. The obvious choice is to simply give each employee a raise. However, you have heard that many
   businesses are compensating their employees for meeting various goals that are beneficial to the
   business. What types of goals might the dental practice have? What are several ideas for ways to
   motivate the staff, which consists of a receptionist, dental assistants, and dental hygienists? What are
   possible rewards for meeting goals?

Advantages Derived from Performance Measurement

Every business has a strategic plan, or a broad vision of how it will be in the future. This plan leads to goals
that must be achieved to fulfill that vision. As shown in Figure 12.2, a business will use the strategic plan to
determine the goals needed to achieve the strategic vision. Once goals are determined, the business will
decide on the appropriate actions necessary to meet the goals. Then, the business will implement, review, and
adjust the goals as needed. Properly designed performance measures will help move the company toward
meeting the goals of its strategic plan. Advantages of a good performance management system include
increased employee retention and loyalty, better communication between the various levels of management,
increased productivity, and increased efficiencies. In addition, a well-designed performance plan should lead
to improved job satisfaction for the manager and increased personal wealth if the rewards are monetarily
based. In summary, a company needs to first identify and create a strategy and then set the necessary goals,
which will lead to actions, and finally to an applicable evaluation process.

Figure 12.2 Strategy-to-Action Sequence. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-
SA 4.0 license)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures                                                     623

YOUR TURN

Measuring Employee Performance

All companies need ways to measure the performance of employees. These measures should be
designed in a way that the rewards for performance will motivate the employees to make decisions that
are good for the business. Reflecting on the Why It Matters scenario, if this were your company, what are
five goals you would have for your business? What are some measures you could use to see if you are
meeting those goals? What types of incentives could you offer to motivate your employees to help meet
these goals? Use Table 12.1 for your answers.

                Motivating Employees toward Business Goals

Five Business   Measures to Meet                              Incentives to Motivate Employees toward
     Goals               Goals                                                           Goals

Table 12.1
Solution
Answers will vary. Sample answer:

 Five Business           Motivating Employees toward Business Goals
      Goals     Measures to Meet Goals Incentives to Motivate Employees toward Goals

Grow customer   Number of new customers                       Give a gift card to employees for each new
base                                                          customer they get
                Number of "likes" on                          Host a party or take employees to dinner after
Increase        Facebook, number of                           certain number of likes or positive reviews occur
company name    reviews on Google
recognition     Percent change in revenue                     Have a bonus pool that is shared after a targeted
                from prior quarter                            percentage increase in revenue is reached
Grow revenue
each quarter
624                                                                               Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures

      Five Business           Motivating Employees toward Business Goals
           Goals     Measures to Meet Goals Incentives to Motivate Employees toward Goals

     Lower cost of   Compare supplies used to      Provide a paid day off for suggestions that
     supplies used   a standard for each type of   successfully reduce cost of supplies per job by 5%
     per job         job
                                                   Pay a flat additional amount for each time the
     Decrease time   Measure time on job using     employee performs a job within the allotted time
     at each job/    a call-in system of entering  and that customer satisfaction is a 5/5
     increase        and leaving the job
     efficiency

Potential Limitations of Traditional Performance Measurement

What types of measures are used to evaluate management performance? Historically, performance
measurement systems have been based on accounting or other quantitative numbers. One reason for this is
that most accounting-based measures are easy to use due to their availability, since many accounting
measures can be found in or generated from a company's financial statements. Although this type of
information is readily available, it does not mean the use of accounting numbers as performance measures is
the best or only way to measure performance. One issue is that some accounting numbers can be affected by
the actions of managers, and this may result in distorted performance results.

For example, as shown in Figure 12.3, if a retail company uses a last-in, first-out (LIFO) inventory system and
the manager of the retail store is evaluated based on either cost containment or profit, the manager can
postpone a decision to purchase inventory at the end of the year until the beginning of the next fiscal year if
prices of the inventory have risen. This decision will postpone the effect of that purchase and, in turn, the
higher costs associated with that inventory, until the next accounting cycle. As you can see, in either scenario,
the company ordered 500,000 units of inventory but the timing of those orders, given the changing prices of
the inventory, has a significant effect on income from operations. This scenario is an example of the possibility
of an unintended conflict of interests between procurement and production decisions by an individual
manager or department and the overall best interests of the company. A well-designed performance
measurement system should eliminate these potential conflicts, as much as possible.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures  625

Figure 12.3 Effects on Income of Delaying Inventory Order. If LIFO is being used and inventory prices are
rising, when inventory is ordered has an impact on income. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Accounting numbers are often affected by economic conditions, but these economic effects are beyond the
control of the manager. For example, if the parts used in a manufacturing process are ordered from another
country, the manager cannot control the exchange rate that occurs between the two currencies, yet this can
impact the cost of the components to the manager and thus affect the cost of the product the company is
producing.

Some management decisions affect multiple periods, or the decision being made will have the greatest impact
in a future period. For example, capital budgeting decisions affect not only the current but future periods as
well. This may compel a manager to have a short-term focus, because increasing his immediate remuneration,
or compensation, is often his goal. Many long-term decisions, such as capital budgeting decisions,
maintenance on equipment, or advertising campaigns, may most significantly affect future accounting
numbers and, in turn, the compensation of the manager in future periods. If a manager cannot see himself
reaping the rewards of that decision in future years, the decision becomes less attractive. If a performance
measurement system is not designed properly, it can lead to managers having a short-term focus or making
decisions that have the greatest impact on their individual goals (such as reaching a bonus goal), even if these
decisions are not in the best long-term interest of the corporation. Last, a manager focused solely on
accounting numbers may miss opportunities for future benefits because making the decision will have a
negative impact on accounting measures in the current period. For example, spending money to build a
potential customer database may decrease income in the current year. If the manager's performance is
measured based on the profitability of his division, he may avoid spending the money to create the customer
database. However, that database may result in a significant increase in profitability in future years if the
potential customers become actual customers.
626  Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures

Is there a way to prevent these issues associated with using accounting measures as performance measures?
The use of nonaccounting measures in conjunction with accounting-based measures can help mitigate the
problems of using accounting-based measures alone. Therefore, most performance measurement systems
today use a combination of accounting-based measures and non-accounting-based measures, short-term or
long-term indicators, or quantitative and qualitative components. Let's first look at the use of accounting-
based measures, and then we'll consider a methodology that also incorporates non-accounting-based
measures.

   THINK IT THROUGH

   Balancing Customer Needs with Company Needs

   Noah Barnes just graduated from college and took a position as production supervisor for Morgensen
   Machines, who manufactures sewing machine and vacuum cleaner parts. On his first day at work, one of
   Morgensen's sales managers asked Noah if it would be OK to rearrange his manufacturing job schedule
   so that a special order from a new customer could be pushed to the front of the line. This new customer
   requires fast turnarounds; unfortunately, this also means running the production equipment for all three
   shifts at maximum output for at least one week, possibly more. This would completely prohibit the
   schedule that management told Noah to implement. Noah does not want to make the sales manager
   angry at him, but he also does not want to lose his job in the first month out of college. He knows that
   the manager is focused on landing this new customer, who could reward the company with a needed
   increase in overall sales and plant output. The problems, as Noah sees them, are that (1) current jobs will
   be delayed; (2) there will be greater demand on the machines during all three shifts, increasing the
   possibility that they will fail; (3) there will not be time for needed maintenance; and (4) eventually all of
   these factors will snowball into significant delays for the new customer, as well as extensive delays for
   the previously scheduled orders.

   How should Noah handle this problem? What managerial principles would you advise him to use from
   his college studies to help him develop better policies for future events like this?

 12.2 Identify the Characteristics of an Effective Performance Measure

It is important to identify the characteristics that make a performance measure a good assessment of goal
congruence. A good performance measurement system will align the goals of management with the goals of
the corporation, and both parties will benefit. A lack of goal congruence in a performance measurement
system can be detrimental to a business in many ways. Without proper performance measures, goal
congruence is almost impossible to achieve and will likely lead to lost profits and dissatisfied employees,
A good performance measurement system should have the following characteristics:

  · It should be based on activities over which managers have control or influence.
  · It should be measurable.
  · It should be timely.
  · It should be consistent in its application.
  · When appropriate, the actual results should be compared with the budgeted results, standards, or past

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures  627

      performance.
  · The measurements must not favor the manager over the goals of the entire organization. Often,

      managers have the ability to make decisions that favor their individual units but that may be detrimental
      to the overall performance of the organization.

As you've learned, it is important that the activities on which managers are evaluated are within that
manager's control. In addition, it is very important for the information that is used in the performance
measurement system be gathered, evaluated, and presented in a timely manner. Performance measurement
systems provide an indication of how well the evaluated managers are doing their jobs. Remember, the
organization wants managers to make decisions that are in the best interest of the organization as a whole,
and hence the need for the performance management system. If managers do not receive appropriate
feedback in a timely manner, they will not know which decisions they should continue to make in the same
manner and which are less effective. The same is true from the corporation's perspective. Timely information
allows the evaluation team to determine the effects of individual management decisions on the corporation as
a whole.

In addition to being timely, performance measures need to be applied or measured consistently. The
accounting variables or other measures that are used to evaluate a manager should be measured the same
way from period to period. For example, if a performance measure includes some form of income, such as
operating income, then that measure should be used each time and not replaced with another income
measure for the current measurement cycle (usually one year). If, upon further analysis, it seems that net
income is a better measure to use in the evaluation of a manager, then the new measure can be implemented
during the next measurement cycle. When measures are changed, it is imperative that the manager being
evaluated is aware of the measurement change, as this may affect his or her decision-making. The idea is to
keep the targets stable for a period. Otherwise, the measurements might be inconsistent, and thus
misleading. A good performance measurement plan would include the manager's input in the design
discussion. Not only does this help to ensure that the plan is clear to all parties involved in the process, it also
helps to motivate managers. Rather than being told what goals are to be met, managers will be more
motivated to achieve the goals if they have input into the process, the goals to be reached, and the
measurements or metrics being used.

Performance measures are only useful if there is a baseline against which to compare the measured results.
For example, students often evaluate how well they performed on a test by comparing their grade to the
average for the test. If a student scored 65 out of 100 on a test, the initial response may be that this is a less
than stellar grade unless that score is compared to the average. Suppose the average on that particular test
was a 50. Obviously, in this example, the student performed above average on this test, but this could not be
interpreted correctly until the score was compared to a baseline. In evaluating performance measures, a
standard, baseline, or threshold is typically used as a basis against which to compare the actual results of the
manager.

A company has both short- and long-term goals. Short-term goals include reducing costs of production by a
certain percentage for the current year or increasing year-over-year sales by a certain percentage. Long-term
goals may include expanding into new territories or adding new products. Employees also have short- and
long-term goals. Short-term goals can include a beach vacation, and long-term goals can include saving for
retirement or college. A good performance measurement system will include both short- and long-term
measures in order to motivate managers to make decisions that will fulfill both the corporations and their own
short- and long-term goals.

You've learned about the human factor that causes managers to make what is typically the best decision for
themselves rather than the best decision for the overall good of the corporation, especially if the decision that
628                                                                               Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures

benefits the corporation is not beneficial to the manager. Again, this means the performance measurement
system must attempt to prevent the manager from benefitting without the corporation also benefitting. This is
one of the trickiest parts of performance measurement system design.

For example, suppose the manager of the used car department at an automobile dealership is responsible for
the profit he makes selling used cars that were taken as trade-ins on new car sales. Some of these used cars
need a few repairs to prepare them for sale. The manager has the option of getting the cars fixed using the
service department at the dealership or outsourcing the repairs to another company. If the manager can get
the repairs completed at a lower cost at another repair shop, and if he is evaluated and receives a bonus based
on his profit, then he is likely to use the outside repair shop. Is this a good thing to do? Obviously, it is good for
the manager of the used car department who will have fewer costs getting the used car ready to sell and
therefore will make more of a profit from the sale of that car. Higher profits for the used car department mean
a higher bonus for the manager. But what about for the dealership? Was outsourcing the repairs the right
decision?

It depends on several factors, but here are points to ponder. What if the dealership's service department is
more expensive because it provides higher-quality parts and the mechanics are certified? Does the reputation
of the quality of the used cars sold by the dealership affect more than just the used car department? What if
the service department could have completed the work at cost? As you can tell by these questions, without
further information, we do not know whether or not the used car manager should outsource the repairs. But
we do know that his decision was based on his bonus being tied to his profitability and not linked to other
factors such as dealership profitability or dealership reputation (customer satisfaction). Therefore, it is
important that the performance management system not promote decisions that only benefit the manager to
the detriment of the corporation.

   CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

   Performance Measures at NASA[1]

   Nearly twenty years ago, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) along with five NASA
   contractors undertook a project to derive performance measures. As a result, they developed a series of
   five models for measures. These measures included effectiveness, quantity, quality, value, and change,
   and are as follows:

      · Effectiveness was measured as projected/actual. An example was number of tests completed/
          number of tests planned.

      · Quantity was measured as process or product unit/sources of cost. An example was total number of
          wind tunnel tests run/facilities management cost.

      · Quality was measured as indicators of error or loss/process or product unit. An example of quality
          measures is mistakes in work packages issued/work packages issued in total.

      · Value was measured as desirability/source of cost. An example of value measures is savings from
          suggestion program/man hours to review suggestions.

      · Change was measured as the information provided by the indexes that are developed by tracking
          the same performance measures over time. An example would be the improvement measures, like
              Reduction by X percent in downtime of facilities/tests accomplished or attempted or
              Increase by X percent of documents prepared/procurement clerk

   These measures have some distinct advantages but also may be met with some resistance from

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures                                              629

employees and contractors. Advantages likely included a better understanding of their processes as well
as an understanding of the amount of time wasted and value emulating from these processes.
Development and implementation become an opportunity to discover what may be wrong with
processes, to start a dialogue concerning ongoing change and improvement, and to communicate and
brainstorm about organizational inefficiencies. Networking involved in development of the performance
measures can become an equalizer among processes that break down silos and complexity.

Resistance would likely come from the measurements being too time consuming and the processes too
complex to be charted for these measurement objectives. How can upper management judge the
complex progress on projects if they have little to no involvement? If these measures were so important,
then NASA would have already developed them in an organization that was started around 1960.
Resistance like this develops as one where the prior absence of these measures becomes the primary
resistance toward developing them.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   General Electric is changing their performance measurement practices to more closely align with the
   goals of millennials. Read the Impraise blog on GE Performance Reviews (https://openstax.org/l/
   50GE_perform) for more details.

 12.3 Evaluate an Operating Segment or a Project Using Return on Investment,
Residual Income, and Economic Value Added

There are three performance measures commonly used when a manager has control over investments, such
as the buying and selling of inventory and equipment: return on investment, residual income, and economic
value added. These measures use financial accounting data to evaluate how well a manager is meeting certain
goals.

Introduction to Return on Investment, Residual Income, and Economic Value Added as
Evaluative Tools

One of the primary goals of a company is to be profitable. There are many ways a company can use profits. For
example, companies can retain profits for future use, they can distribute them to shareholders in the form of
dividends, or they can use the profits to pay off debts. However, none of these options actually contributes to
the growth of the company. In order to stay profitable, a company must continuously evolve. A fourth option
for the use of company profits is to reinvest the profits into the company in order to help it grow. For example,
a company can buy new assets such as equipment, buildings, or patents; finance research and development;
acquire other companies; or implement a vigorous advertising campaign. There are many options that will
help the company to grow and to continue to be profitable.
One way to measure how effective a company is at using its invested profits to be profitable is by measuring

1 D. Kinlaw. "Developing Performance Measures with Aerospace Managers." National Productivity Review. December 1, 1986.
630                                                                               Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures

its return on investment (ROI), which shows the percentage of income generated by profits that were
invested in capital assets. It is calculated using the following formula:

Capital assets are those tangible and intangible assets that have lives longer than one year; they are also
called fixed assets. ROI in its basic form is useful; however, there are really two components of ROI: sales
margin and asset turnover. This is known as the DuPont Model. It originated in the 1920s when the DuPont
company implemented it for internal measurement purposes. The DuPont model can be expressed using this
formula:

Sales margin indicates how much profit is generated by each dollar of sales and is computed as shown:

Asset turnover indicates the number of sales dollars produced by every dollar invested in capital assets--in
other words, how efficiently the company is using its capital assets to generate sales. It is computed as:

Using ROI represented as Sales Margin × Asset Turnover, we can get another formula for ROI. Substituting the
formulas for each of these individual ratios, ROI can be expressed as:

To visualize this ROI formula in another way, we can deconstruct it into its components, as in Figure 12.4.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures  631

Figure 12.4 Decomposition of ROI into the Components Sales Margin and Asset Turnover. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
When sales margin and asset turnover are multiplied by each other, the sales components of each measure
will cancel out, leaving

ROI captures the nuances of both elements. A good sales margin and a proper asset turnover are both needed
for a successful operation. As an example, a jewelry store typically has a very low turnover but is profitable
because of its high sales margin. A grocery store has a much lower sales margin but is successful because of
high turnover. You can see it is important to understand each of these individual components of ROI.

Calculation and Interpretation of the Return on Investment

To put these concepts in context, consider a bakery called Scrumptious Sweets, Inc., that has three divisions
and evaluates the managers of each of these decisions based on ROI. The following information is available for
these divisions:

This information can be used to find the sales margin, asset turnover, and ROI for each division:
632  Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures

Alternatively, ROI could have been calculated by multiplying Sales Margin × Asset Turnover:

ROI measures the return in a percentage form rather than in absolute dollars, which is helpful when
comparing projects, divisions, or departments of different sizes. How do we interpret the ROIs for Scrumptious
Sweets? Suppose Scrumptious has set a target ROI for each division at 30% in order to share in the bonus
pool. In this case, both the donut division and the bagel division would participate in the company bonus pool.
What does the analysis regarding the brownie division show? By looking at the breakdown of ROI into its
component parts of sales margin and asset turnover, it is apparent that the brownie division has a higher sales
margin than the donut division, but it has a lower asset turnover than the other divisions, and this is affecting
the brownie division's ROI. This would provide direction for management of the brownie division to investigate
why their asset turnover is significantly lower than the other two divisions. Again, ROI is useful if there is a
benchmark against which to compare, but it cannot be judged as a stand-alone measure without that
comparison.
Managers want a high ROI, so they strive to increase it. Looking at its components, there are certain decisions
managers can make to increase their ROI. For example, the sales margin component can be increased by
increasing income, which can be done by either increasing sales revenue or decreasing expenses. Sales
revenue can be increased by increasing sales price per unit without losing volume, or by maintaining current
sales price but increasing the volume of sales. Asset turnover can be increased by increasing sales revenue or
decreasing the amount of capital assets. Capital assets can be decreased by selling off assets such as
equipment.
For example, suppose the manager of the brownie division has been running a new advertising campaign and
is estimating that his sales volume will increase by 5% over the next year due to this ad campaign. This
increase in sales volume will lead to an increase in income of $140,000. What does this do to his ROI? Division
income will increase from $1,300,000 to $1,440,000, and the division average assets will stay the same, at
$4,835,000. This will lead to an ROI of 30%, which is the ROI that must be achieved to participate in the bonus
pool.
Another factor to consider is the effect of depreciation on ROI. Assets are depreciated over time, and this will
reduce the value of the capital assets. A reduction in the capital assets results in an increase in ROI. Looking at

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures  633

the bagel division, suppose the assets in that division depreciated $500,000 from the beginning of the year to
the end of the year and that no capital assets were sold and none were purchased. Look at the effect on ROI:

Notice that depreciation helped to improve the division's ROI even though management made no new
decisions. Some companies will calculate ROI based on historical cost, while others keep the calculation based
on depreciated assets with the idea that the manager is efficiently using the assets as they age. However, if
depreciated values are used in the calculation of ROI, as assets are replaced, the ROI will drop from the prior
period.
One drawback to using ROI is the potential of decreased goal congruence. For example, assume that one of
the goals of a corporation is to have ROI of at least 15% (the cost of capital) on all new projects. Suppose one
of the divisions within this corporation currently has a ROI of 20%, and the manager is evaluating the
production of a new product in his division. If analysis shows that the new project is predicted to have a ROI of
18%, would the manager move forward with the project? Top management would opt to accept the
production of the new product. However, since the project would decrease the division's current ROI, the
division manager may reject the project to avoid decreasing his overall performance and possibly his overall
compensation. The division manager is making an intentional choice based on his division's ROI relative to
corporate ROI.
In other situations, the use of ROI can unintentionally lead to improper decision-making. For example, look at
the ROI for the following investment opportunities faced by a manager:

In this example, though investment opportunity 1 has a higher ROI, it does not generate any significant
income. Therefore, it is important to look at ROI among other factors in order to make an informed decision.

Calculation and Interpretation of the Residual Income

Another performance measure is residual income (RI), which shows the amount of income a given division
(or project) is expected to earn in excess of a firm's minimum return goal. Every company sets a minimum
required rate of return on projects and investments, representing the minimum return, usually in percentage
form, that a project or investment must produce in order for the company to be willing to undertake it. This
return is used as a basis for evaluating investments so that the firm may meet its targets and goals, and
ensures that only profitable projects will be accepted. (You will learn the theory and mechanics behind
establishing a minimum required rate of return in advanced accounting courses.)
Think about this concept in your own life. If you plan to invest in stocks, bonds, a work of art, precious stones,
a graduate degree, or a business, you would want to know what your expected return would be before you
634                                                                               Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures

made that investment. Most people shy away from investing time or money in things that do not provide a
certain return, whether that return is money, happiness, or satisfaction. A company has to make similar
decisions and decide where to spend its money and does not want to spend it in areas that will not return a
minimum profit to the company and its shareholders. Companies will determine a minimum required rate of
return as a basis against which to compare investment opportunities to aid in the decision of whether or not
to accept a project. This minimum required rate of return is used to calculate residual income, which uses this
formula:

Suppose the donut division of Scrumptious Sweets is considering acquiring new machinery to speed up the
production of donuts and make the donuts more uniform in shape and size. The cost of the machine is
$1,500,000, and it is expected to generate a profit of $250,000. Scrumptious has a corporate policy of a
required minimum rate of return on projects of 18%. Based on residual income, should the donut division
move forward on this project?

                                               RI = $250,000 - ($1,500,000 × 0.18)
                                               RI = -$20,000

A project will be accepted as long as the RI is a positive number, because that implies the project is earning
more than the minimum required by the company. Therefore, the manager of the donut division would not
accept this project based on RI alone. Note that RI is measured in absolute dollars. This makes it almost
impossible to compare firms of different sizes or projects of different sizes to one another. Both ROI and RI are
useful, but as shown, both tools have drawbacks. Therefore, many companies will use a combination of ROI
and RI (as well as other measures) to evaluate performance.

Calculation and Interpretation of Economic Value Added

Economic value added (EVA) is similar to RI but is a measure of shareholder wealth that is being created by a
project, segment, or division. Companies want to maximize shareholder wealth, and to do that, they have to
generate enough income to cover their cost of debt and their cost of equity, but also to have income available
to shareholders. Just as in residual income, the goal is a positive EVA. A positive EVA indicates management
has effectively used its capital assets to increase the value of the firm and thus the wealth of shareholders. EVA
is computed as shown:

After-tax income is the income reduced by tax expenses. The weighted average cost of capital (WACC) is
the cost that the company expects to pay on average to finance assets and growth using either debt or equity.
WACC is based on the proportion of debt and equity held by a company and the costs of each of those. For
example, if a company has a total of $1,000,000 in debt and equity, consisting of $400,000 in debt and $600,000
in stock, then the proportion of the company's capital structure that is debt is 40% ($400,000/$1,000,000), and
the proportion that is equity is 60% ($600,000/$1,000,000).

What about the cost component for each? A company raises capital (money) in three primary ways: borrowing
(debt), issuing stock (equity), or earning it (income). The cost of debt is the after-tax interest rate associated
with borrowing money. The cost of equity is the rate associated with what the shareholders expect the
corporation to earn in order for that shareholder to maintain ownership in the company. For example,
shareholders of Apple stock may on average expect the company to earn a return of 10% per year; otherwise,

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures                               635

they will sell their stock.

Sometimes the weighted average cost of capital and the required rate of return are the same for some
companies, but often they will differ. Suppose Scrumptious Sweets, for example, has both debt capital and
equity capital. Table 12.2 lists the cost of each type of capital as well as what proportion of the capital is made
up of each of the two types. Notice that debt makes up 45% of the capital of Scrumptious Sweets and that the
cost of debt is 8%. Equity makes up the other 55% of the capital structure of Scrumptious and the cost of
equity is 9.8%. The weighted average cost of capital is the sum of each of the weighted cost of each type of
capital. Thus, the weighted cost of debt is 0.08 × 0.45 = 0.036 or 3.6% and the weighted cost of equity is 0.098 ×
0.55 = 0.054 or 5.4%. This results in a weighted average cost of capital of 3.6% plus 5.4%, or 9%.

        Scrumptious Sweets' Weighted Average Cost of Capital

        Type of Capital                    A                                     B                A × B
                                  Cost of Capital             Proportion of Total Capital  Weighted Cost

Debt                              8%                          45%                                 3.6%
                                                                                                  5.4%
Equity                            9.8%                        55%                                  9%

Weighted Average Cost of Capital

Table 12.2

Reconsidering the new machine the donut division wants to buy, and using EVA to evaluate the project
decision, would the decision change? Remember, the cost of the machine is $1,500,000, and it is expected to
generate a profit of $250,000. Assume the tax rate for Scrumptious is 40%. To calculate EVA for the project, we
need the following:

The positive EVA of $15,000 indicates that the project is generating income for the shareholders and should be
accepted.

As you can see, though RI and EVA look similar, they can lead to different decisions. This difference stems from
two sources. First, RI is calculated based on management's choice for the required rate of return, which can be
determined from many different variables, whereas the weighted average cost of capital is based on the actual
cost of debt and the estimated cost of equity, weighted by the actual percentages of both components.
Second, when used to evaluate unit managers, RI often is based on pretax income, whereas EVA is based on
after-tax income to the company itself. EVA and RI do not always lead to different decisions, but it is important
that managers understand the components of both measures to ensure they make the best decision for the
company.
636                                                                               Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures

Considerations in Using the Three Evaluative Tools

One of the most challenging aspects of using ROI, RI, and EVA lies in the determination of the variables used
to calculate these measures. Income and invested capital are factors in the ROI, RI, and EVA performance
models, and each can be defined in several ways. Invested capital can be defined as fixed assets, productive
assets, or operating assets. Fixed assets typically include only tangible long-term assets. Productive assets
typically include inventory plus the fixed assets. Operating assets include productive assets plus intangible
assets, and current assets. One problem is determining which assets the manager can control with his or her
decision-making authority. Each definition of invested capital will have a different impact on the performance
measure, whether that measure is ROI, RI, or EVA. Deciding how to define invested capital is further
complicated when combined with the additional decision of whether to use net book value (depreciated value)
or gross book value (nondepreciated value) of long-lived assets. Net book value is the historical cost of an
asset minus any accumulated depreciation, whereas gross book value is merely the historical cost of the asset.
Obviously at the time of acquisition of an asset, these two numbers are the same, but over time, net book
value will decrease for any given asset, while gross book value will stay the same for that asset. Using gross
book value will result in a higher value for invested capital than using net book value. Remember, net book
value will vary based on the depreciation method employed--straight line versus double declining balance, for
example. Thus, gross book value removes the effect of choosing different depreciation methods. Despite this,
most companies use net book value in the computation of ROI since net book value aligns with their financial
reporting of capital assets on the balance sheet at their net value. Assets can also be measured at fair value,
also known as market value. This is the value at which the assets could be sold. Fair value is only used in
special cases of computing ROI such as in computing ROI for a real estate investment. The reason fair value is
not typically used for ROI is that the fair or market value is rarely known or determinable with certainty and is
often very subjective, whereas both gross and book value are readily known and determinable.

The second major component of these performance measures involves which income measure to use. First
and foremost, no matter how a company measures income, the most important point is that the income the
company uses as a measure should be controllable income if the performance model is to be a motivator and
if the company uses responsibility accounting. Income, sometimes referred to as earnings, can be measured in
many ways, and there are often common acronyms given for some of the these measures. Common ways to
measure income are operating income (income before taxes); earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT);
earnings before interest, taxes, and depreciation (EBITDA); net income (income after taxes); or return on funds
employed (ROFE), which adds working capital to any of the other income measures. Companies must decide
which income measure they want to use in their determination of these various performance metrics. They
must consider how the metric is being used, who they are evaluating by that metric, and whether the income
and capital asset chosen capture the decision-making authority of the individual or division whose
performance is being evaluated.

     YOUR TURN

     SkyHigh Superball Decisions

     The manager of the SkyHigh division of Superball Corp. is faced with a decision on whether or not to buy
     a new machine that will mix the ingredients used in the SkyHigh superball produced by the SkyHigh
     division. This ball bounces as high as a two-story building upon first bounce and is so popular that the

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures                                            637

SkyHigh division barely keeps up with demand. The manager is hoping the new machine will allow the
balls to be produced more quickly and therefore increase the volume of production within the same time
currently being used in production. The manager wants to evaluate the effect of the purchase of the
machine on his compensation. He receives a base salary plus a 25% bonus of his salary if he meets
certain income goals. The information he has available for the analysis is shown here:

The manager is looking at several different measures to evaluate this decision. Answer the following
questions:

 1. What is the sales margin without the new machine?
 2. What is the asset turnover without the new machine?
 3. What is ROI without the new machine?
 4. What is RI without the new machine?
 5. What is EVA without the new machine?
 6. What is the sales margin with the new machine?
 7. What is the asset turnover with the new machine?
 8. What is ROI with the new machine?
 9. What is RI with the new machine?
10. What is EVA with the new machine?
11. Should the manager buy the new machine? Why or why not?
12. How would ROI be affected if the invested capital were measured at gross book value, and the gross

      book values of the beginning and end of the year assets without the new machine were $11,000,000
      and $11,800,000, respectively?

Solution

 1. Income/Sales: $7,000,000/$18,000,000 = 39%
 2. Sales/Average Assets: $18,000,000/[($12,000,000 + $12,400,000)/2] = 1.48 times
 3. Income/Average Assets: $7,000,000/[($12,000,000 + $12,400,000)/2] = 58%

      Or #1 × #2: 39% × 1.48 = 58%
 4. Income - (Invested Capital × Minimum Required Rate of Return)

      $7,000,000 - ($12,200,000 × 0.15) = $5,170,000
 5. After-Tax Income - (Invested Capital × Weighted Average Cost of Capital)

      [$7,000,000 × (1 - 0.30)] × ($12,200,000 × 0.09) = $3,802,000
 6. Income/Sales: $8,000,000/$19,400,000 = 41%
 7. Sales/Average Assets: $19,400,000/[($12,000,000 + $12,400,000)/2] = 1.59 times
 8. Income/Average Assets: $8,000,000/[($12,000,000 + $12,400,000)/2] = 66%
638  Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures

      Or #7 × #8: 41% × 1.59 = 66%
 9. Income - (Invested Capital × Minimum Required Rate of Return)

      $8,000,000 - (12,200,000 × 0.15) = $6,170,000
10. After-Tax Income - (Invested Capital × Weighted Average Cost of Capital)

      [$8,000,000 × (1 - 0.30)] - ($12,200,000 × 0.09) = $4,502,000
11. The manager of the SkyHigh division of Superball Corp. should accept the project, as the project

      improves all of his performance measures.
12. Income/Average Assets: $8,000,000/[($13,000,000 + $13,800,000)/2] = 60% This shows that the choice

      used as the measure of assets can affect the analysis.

 12.4 Describe the Balanced Scorecard and Explain How It Is Used

The performance measures considered up to this point have relied only on financial accounting measures as
the means to evaluate performance. Over time, the trend has become to incorporate both quantitative and
qualitative measures and short- and long-term goals when evaluating the performance of managers as well as
the company as a whole. One approach to evaluating both financial and nonfinancial measures is to use a
balanced scorecard.

History and Function of the Balanced Scorecard

Suppose you work in retail and your compensation consists of an hourly wage plus a bonus based on your
sales. You have excellent interpersonal skills, and customers appreciate your help and often seek you out
when they come to the store. Some of your customers will return on a different day, even making an extra trip
to the store to make sure you are the employee who helps them. Sometimes these customers buy items and
other times they do not, but they always come back. Your compensation does not include any
acknowledgment of your attention to customers and your ability to keep them returning to the store, but
consider how much more you could earn if this were the case. However, in order for compensation to include
nonfinancial, or qualitative, factors, the store would need to track nonfinancial information, in addition to the
financial, or quantitative, information already tracked in the accounting system. One way to track both
qualitative and quantitative measures is to use a balanced scorecard.

The idea for using a balanced scorecard to evaluate employees was first suggested by Art Schneiderman of
Analog Devices in 1987 as a means to improve corporate performance by using metrics to measure
improvements in areas in which Analog Devices was struggling, such as in a high number of defects.
Schneiderman went through different iterations of a balanced scorecard design over several years, but the
final design chosen measured three different categories: financial, customer, and internal. The financial
category included measures such as return on assets and revenue growth, the customer category included
measures such as customer satisfaction and on-time delivery, and the internal category included measures
such as reduced defects and improved throughput time. Eventually, Robert Kaplan and David Norton, both
Harvard University faculty, expanded upon Schneiderman's ideas to create the current concept of the
balanced scorecard and four general categories for evaluation: financial perspective, customer perspective,
internal perspective, and learning and growth. These categories are sometimes modified for particular
industries.

Therefore, a balanced scorecard evaluates employees on an assortment of quantitative factors, or metrics

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures                                                     639

based on financial information, and qualitative factors, or those based on nonfinancial information, in
several significant areas. The quantitative or financial measurements tend to emphasize past results, often
based on their financial statements, while the qualitative or nonfinancial measurements center on current
results or activities, with the intent to evaluate activities that will influence future financial performance.

   ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

   Use of a Balanced Scorecard Leads to Ethical Decision-Making

   Managers and employees generally strive to create and work in an ethical environment. In order to
   develop such an environment, employees need to be informed of the organization's ethical standards
   and values and have an understanding of the laws and regulations under which the organization
   operates. If employees do not know the standards by which they will be measured, they might not be
   aware if their behavior is ethical. A balanced scorecard allows employees to understand their
   organization's obligations, and to evaluate their own obligations in the workplace.

   To evaluate their ethical environment, organizations can hold meetings that use ethical analysis metrics.
   Kaplan and Norton, leaders in balanced scorecard use, explain the use of the balanced scorecard in the
   context of strategy review meetings: Companies conduct strategy review meetings to discuss the
   indicators and initiatives from the unit's Balanced Scorecard and assess the progress of and barriers to
   strategy execution.[2] In such meetings, the metrics analyzed should include, but not be limited to, the
   availability of a hotline; employee participation in ethics training; satisfaction of customers, employees,
   and other stakeholders; employee turnover rate; regulation compliance; community involvement;
   environmental awareness; diversity; legal expenses; efficient asset usage; condition of assets; and social
   responsibility.[3] Metrics should be tailored to an organization's values and desired operational results.
   The use of a balanced scorecard helps lead to an ethical environment for employees and managers.

Four Components of a Balanced Scorecard

To create a balanced scorecard, a company will start with its strategic goals and organize them into key areas.
The four key areas used by Kaplan and Norton were financial perspective, internal operations perspective,
customer perspective, and learning and growth (Figure 12.5).

2 Alistair Craven. An Interview with Robert Kaplan & David Norton (Emerald Publishing, 2008). http://www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/
learning/management_thinking/interviews/kaplan_norton.htm
3 Paul Arveson. The Ethics Perspective (Balanced Scorecard Institute, Strategy Management Group, 2002). https://www.balancedscorecard.org/
The-Ethics-Perspective
640  Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures

Figure 12.5 Four Key Areas of a Balanced Scorecard. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under
CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

These areas were chosen by Kaplan and Norton because the success of a company is dependent on how it
performs financially, which is directly related to the company's internal operations, how the customer
perceives and interacts with the company, and the direction in which the company is headed. The use of the
balanced scorecard allows the company to take a stakeholder perspective as compared to a stockholder
perspective. Stockholders are the owners of the company stock and often are most concerned with the
profitability of the company and thus focus primarily on financial results. Stakeholders are people who are
affected by the decisions made by a company, such as investors, creditors, managers, regulators, employees,
customers, suppliers, and even laypeople who are concerned about whether or not the company is a good
world citizen. This is why social responsibility factors are sometimes included in balanced scorecards. To
understand where these types of factors might fit in a balanced scorecard framework, let's look at the four
sections or categories of a balanced scorecard.

Financial Perspective

The financial performance section of a balanced scorecard retains the types of metrics that have historically
been set by companies to evaluate performance. The particular metric used in the scorecard will vary
depending on the type of company involved, who is being evaluated, and what is being measured. You've
learned that ROI, RI, and EVA can be used to evaluate performance. There are other financial measures that
can be used as well, for example, earnings per share (EPS), revenue growth, sales growth, inventory turnover,
and many others. The type of financial measures used should capture the components of the decision-making
tasks of the person being evaluated. Financial measures can be very broad and general, such as sales growth,
or they can be more specific, such as seat revenue. Looking back at the Scrumptious Sweets example, financial
measures could include baked goods revenue growth, drink revenue growth, and product cost containment.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures  641

Internal Business Perspective

A successful company should operate like a well-tuned machine. This requires that the company monitor its
internal operations and evaluate them to ensure they are meeting the strategic goals of the corporation. There
are many variables that could be used as internal business measures, including number of defects produced,
machine downtime, transaction efficiency, and number of products completed per day per employee, or more
refined measures, such as percent of time planes are on the ground, or ensuring air tanks are well stocked for
a scuba diving business. For Scrumptious Sweets, internal measures could include time between production
and sale of the baked goods or amount of waste.

Customer Perspectives

All businesses have customers or clients--a business will cease to operate without them--thus, it is important
for a company to measure how well it is doing with respect to customers. Examples of common variables that
could be measured include customer satisfaction, number of repeat customers, number of new customers,
number of new customers from customer referrals, and market share. Variables that are more specific to a
particular business include factors such as being ranked first in the industry by customers and providing a safe
diving environment for scuba diving. Customer measures for Scrumptious Sweets might include customer
loyalty, customer satisfaction, and number of new customers.

Learning and Growth

The business environment is a very dynamic one and requires a company to constantly evolve in order to
survive, let alone grow. To reach strategic targets such as increased market share, management must focus on
ways to grow the company. The learning and growth measures are a means to assess how the employees and
management are working together to grow the company and to help the employees grow within the
company. Examples of measures in this category include the number of employee suggestions that are
adopted, turnover rates, hours of employee training, scope of process improvements, and number of new
products. Scrumptious Sweets may use learning and growth measures such as hours of customer service
training and hours on workforce relationship training.

Combining the Four Components of a Balanced Scorecard

Balanced scorecards can be created for any type of business and can be used at any level of the organization.
An effective and successful balanced scorecard will start with the strategic plan or goals of the organization.
Those goals are then restated based on the level of the organization to which the balanced scorecard pertains.
A balanced scorecard for an entire organization will be broader and more general in terms of goals and
measures than a balanced scorecard designed for a division manager. Balanced scorecards can even be
created at the individual employee level either as an evaluation mechanism or as a means for the employee to
set and monitor individual goals. Once the strategic goals of the organization are stated for the appropriate
level for which the balanced scorecard is being created, then the measures for each of the categories of the
balanced scorecard should be defined, being sure to consider the areas over which the division or individual
does or does not have control. In addition, the variables have to be obtainable and measurable. Last, the
measures must be useful, meaning that what is actually being measured must be informative, and there must
be a basis of comparison--either company standards or individual targets. Using both quantitative and
nonquantitative performance measures, along with long- and short-term measurements, can be very
beneficial, as they can serve to motivate an employee while providing a clear framework of how that employee
642  Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures

fits into the company's strategic plan.

As an example, let's examine several balanced scorecards for Scrumptious Sweets. First, Figure 12.6 shows an
overall organizational balanced scorecard, the broadest and most general balanced scorecard.

Figure 12.6 Scrumptious Sweets, Inc. Corporate Balanced Scorecard. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Notice that this scorecard starts with the overall corporate mission. It then contains very broad goals and
measures in each of the four categories: financial, customer, internal, and learning and growth. In this
scorecard, there are three general goals for each of these four categories. For example, the goals related to
customers are to improve customer satisfaction, improve customer loyalty, and increase market share. For
each of the goals, there is a general measure that will be used to assess if the goal has been met. In this

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures  643

example, the goal to improve customer satisfaction will be assessed using customer satisfaction surveys. But
remember, measures are only useful as a management tool if there is a target to work toward. In this case, the
goal is to achieve an overall 95% customer satisfaction rating. Obviously, the goals on this scorecard and the
associated measures seem almost vague due to their general nature. However, these goals match with the
overall corporate strategy and provide guidance for management at lower levels to begin dissecting these
goals to more specific ones that pertain to their particular area or division. This allows them to create more
detailed balanced scorecards that will allow them to help meet the overall corporate goals laid out in the
corporate scorecard. Figure 12.7 shows how the corporate balanced scorecard previously presented could be
further detailed for the manager of the brownie division.
644  Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures

Figure 12.7 Scrumptious Sweets, Inc. Brownie Division Balanced Scorecard. (attribution: Copyright Rice

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures  645

University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

As you can see from the balanced scorecard for the brownie division, the same corporate mission is included,
as are the same four categories; however, the divisional goals are more specific, as are the measures and the
targets. For example, related to the overall corporate goal to increase customer satisfaction, the divisional goal
is to meet customers' unique needs. The division will assess how well they are accomplishing this goal by
tracking the number of customer suggestions and customer special requests, such as when a customer
requests a special flavor of brownie not normally produced by the brownie division. The target set by the
management of the brownie division is to meet 95% of customer special requests and to track the number of
customer suggestions that are implemented by the division. The idea is that if the division is meeting
customer needs and requests, this will result in high customer satisfaction, which is an overriding corporate
goal. The success of the division will be based on each employee doing his or her best at his or her specific job.
Therefore, it is useful to see how the balanced scorecard can be used at an individual employee level.
Figure 12.8 shows a balanced scorecard for the brownie division's employees who work in the front end or
store portion of the division.
646  Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures

Figure 12.8 Scrumptious Sweets, Inc. Brownie Division Store Front Employees Balanced Scorecard.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
In this balanced scorecard the same categories are used, but there is more detail about each of the business
objectives, and each objective has more refined measures than the prior two scorecards. Again in the

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures  647

customer category, one of the objectives of the storefront employees is to improve the customer experience.
Notice that there are three initiatives listed to help drive this goal. The measures that would be used to
evaluate the success of these initiatives as well as their specific targets are detailed. Again, the idea is that if
the employees who work in the store portion of the brownie division make the customer experience great, this
will translate into high scores on the customer satisfaction surveys and help the company meet its overriding
goal to increase customer satisfaction. In order to ensure that this occurs, the specific goals and metrics are
created. As previously expressed, it is best if these objectives, measures, and targets are determined by a
process that includes management and the employees. Without employee input, employees may feel resentful
of targets over which they had no input. But, the employees alone cannot set their own goals and targets, as
there could be a tendency to set easy targets, or the employee may not be aware of how his or her efforts
affect the division and overall corporation. Thus, a collaborative approach is best in creating balanced
scorecards.

The three scorecards presented show that the process of creating appropriate and viable scorecards can be
quite complicated and challenging. Determining the appropriate qualitative and quantitative measures can be
a daunting process, but the results can be extremely beneficial. The scorecards can be useful tools at all levels
of the organization if they are adequately thought out and if there is buy-in at all levels being evaluated by a
scorecard. Next, we'll consider how the use of the balanced scorecard and performance measures are not
mutually exclusive and can work well together.

   CONTINUING APPLICATION AT WORK

   Balanced Scorecard

   Let's revisit Gearhead Outfitters in the context of their operating results, internal processes, growth, and
   customer satisfaction. Recall that the company was founded as a single store in 1997 and grew to
   multiple locations mainly in the southern United States. How did Gearhead get there? How did the
   company gather information to make expansion decisions? Now that Gearhead has expanded, should it
   keep all current locations open? Is the company meeting the desires of its customers?

   Questions such as these are addressed through performance measures detailed in a balanced scorecard.
   Financial metrics such as return on investment and residual income give Gearhead information on
   whether or not dollars invested have translated into additional income, and if current income can
   support needed cash flow for current and future operations. While financial measures are important,
   they are only one aspect of evaluating the effectiveness of a company's strategy. Value provided to
   customers should also be considered, as well as the success of internal processes, and whether or not
   the company adequately provides growth opportunities for employees. Sales from new products,
   employee turnover, and customer satisfaction surveys can also provide valuable data for measuring
   success. The idea of a balanced scorecard is to give a business both financial and nonfinancial
   information to use in its strategic decisions.

   The Our Story page of Gearhead's website reads: "Gearhead Outfitters exists to create a positive
   shopping experience for our guests. Gearhead is known for its relaxed environment, specialized
   inventory and customer service for those pursuing an active lifestyle. True to our local roots, we employ
   local residents of each city we operate in, support local organizations, and strive to build relationships
648  Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures

     within our communities."[4]

     Given how Gearhead describes itself, and the performance measures discussed previously, what other
     information might the company want to gather for its balanced scorecard?

Final Summary of Quantitative and Quantitative Performance Measurement Tools

As the business environment changes, one thing stays the same: businesses want to be successful, to be
profitable, and to meet their strategic goals. With these changes in the business environment come more
varied responsibilities placed on managers. These changes occur due to an increased use of technology along
with ever-increasing globalization. It is very important that an organization can appropriately measure
whether employees are meeting these various responsibilities and reward them accordingly.

You've learned about some common performance measures such as ROI, RI, EVA, and the balanced scorecard.
The more accurately and efficiently a company can monitor and measure its decision-making processes at all
levels, the more quickly it can respond to change or problems, and the more likely the company will be able to
meet its strategic goals. Most companies will use some combination of the quantitative and nonquantitative
measures described. ROI, RI, and EVA are typically used to evaluate specific projects, but ROI is sometimes
used as a divisional measure. These measures are all quantitative measures. The balanced scorecard not only
has quantitative measures but adds qualitative measures to address more of the goals of the organization.
The combination of these different types of quantitative and qualitative measures--project-specific measures,
employee-level measures, divisional measures, and corporate measures--enables an organization to more
adequately assess how it is progressing toward meeting short- and long-term goals. Remember, the best
performance measurement system will contain multiple measures and consist of both quantitative and
qualitative factors, which allows for better assessment of managers and better results for the corporation.

   THINK IT THROUGH

   Nonfinancial Measurements of Success

   For each of the following businesses, what are four nonfinancial measures that might be useful for
   helping management evaluate the success of its strategies?

      · Grocery store
      · Hospital
      · Auto manufacturer
      · Law office
      · Coffee shop
      · Movie theater

4 Gearhead Outfitters. "Our Story." https://www.gearheadoutfitters.com/about-us/our-story/
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures  649

     Key Terms

after-tax income income reduced by tax expenses
asset turnover measure of how efficiently a company is using its capital assets to generate revenues
balanced scorecard tool used to evaluate performance using qualitative and nonqualitative measures
capital asset tangible or intangible asset that has a life longer than one year
controllable factor component of the organization for which the manager is responsible and that the

     manager can control
cost center part of an organization in which management is evaluated based on the ability to contain costs;

     the manager primarily has control only over costs
economic value added (EVA) measure of shareholder wealth that is being created by a project, segment, or

     division
fixed asset tangible long-term asset
goal congruence integration of multiple goals, either within an organization or across multiple components

     or entities; congruence is achieved by aligning goals to achieve an anticipated mission
invested capital fixed assets, productive assets, or operating assets
investment center organizational segment in which a manager is accountable for profits (revenues minus

     expenses) and the invested capital used by the segment
metric means to measure something such as a goal or target
minimum required rate of return minimum return, usually in a percentage form, that a project or

     investment must produce in order for the company to be willing to undertake it
operating asset product asset plus intangible asset and current asset
operating income income before considering interest and taxes
performance measure metric used to evaluate a specific attribute of a manager's role
performance measurement system evaluates management in a way that will link the goals of the

     corporation with those of the manager
productive asset fixed asset plus inventory
profit center organizational segment in which a manager is responsible for and evaluted on both revenues

     and costs
qualitative factor component of a decision-making process that cannot be measured numerically
quantitative factor component of a decision-making process that can be measured numerically
residual income (RI) amount of income a given division (or project) is expected to earn in excess of a firm's

     minimum return goal
responsibility accounting method of encouraging goal congruence by setting and communicating the

     financial performance measures by which managers will be evaluated
return on investment (ROI) measure of the percentage of income generated by profits that were invested

     in capital assets
revenue center part of an organization in which management is evaluated based on the ability to generate

     revenues; the manager's primary control is only revenues
sales margin measure of how much profit is generated by each sales dollar
stakeholder someone affected by decisions made by a company; may include an investor, creditor,

     employee, manager, regulator, customer, supplier, and layperson
stockholder owner of stock, or shares, in a business
strategic plan broad vision of how a company will be in the future
uncontrollable factor decision or outcome over which a manager does not have control
650                                                                               Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures

weighted average cost of capital cost that the company expects to pay on average to finance assets and
     growth using either debt or equity

     Summary

12.1 Explain the Importance of Performance Measurement
  · Well-designed performance measurement systems help businesses achieve goal congruence between the
      company and the employees.
  · Managers should be evaluated only on factors over which they have control.
  · Performance measures can be based on financial measures and/or nonfinancial measures.
  · Performance measurement systems should help the company meet its strategic goals while helping the
      employee meet his or her professional goals.

12.2 Identify the Characteristics of an Effective Performance Measure
  · A good performance measurement system uses measures over which a manager has control, provides
      timely and consistent feedback, compares the measures to standards of some form, has both short- and
      long-term measures, and puts the goals of the business and the individual on an equal level.

12.3 Evaluate an Operating Segment or a Project Using Return on Investment, Residual Income, and
Economic Value Added

  · Three common performance measures based on financial numbers are return on investment, residual
      income, and economic value added.

  · Return on investment measures how effectively a company generates income using its assets.
  · ROI can be broken into two separate measures: sales margin and asset turnover.
  · Residual income measures whether or not a project or a division is exceeding a minimum return that has

      been determined by management.
  · Economic value added is used to measure how well a project or division is contributing to shareholder

      wealth.
  · A big challenge with ROI, RI, and EVA is determining which value of income and assets to use in

      calculating these measures.

12.4 Describe the Balanced Scorecard and Explain How It Is Used
  · Balanced scorecards use both financial and nonfinancial measures to evaluate employees.
  · The four categories of a balanced scorecard are financial perspective, internal business perspective,
      customer perspective, and learning and growth perspective.
  · Financial perspective measures are usually traditional measures, based on financial statement
      information such as EPS or ROI.
  · Internal business perspective measures are those that evaluate management's operational goals, such as
      quality control or on-time production.
  · Customer perspective measures are those that evaluate how the customer perceives the business and
      how the business interacts with customers.
  · Learning and growth perspective measures are those that evaluate how effectively the company is
      growing by innovating and creating value. This is often done through employee training.
  · Well-designed balanced scorecards can be very effective at goal congruence through the utilization of
      both financial and nonfinancial measures.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures  651

     Multiple Choice

1. 12.1 Components of the organization that are demotivating for purposes of performance management
are known as ________.

    A. business goals
    B. strategic plans
    C. uncontrollable factors
    D. incentives

2. 12.1 When managerial accountants design an evaluation system that is based on criteria for which a
manager is responsible, and it is structured to encourage managers to make decisions that will meet the goals
of the company as well as their own personal job goals, the framework used is ________.

    A. a controllable factors framework
    B. an uncontrollable factors framework
    C. a strategic plan framework
    D. a responsibility accounting framework

3. 12.1 Goal congruence in well-designed performance measurement systems best explains a congruence
between ________.

    A. employees and the company
    B. strategic plans and the future
    C. decisions and outcomes
    D. feedback and measurement

4. 12.1 Responsibility accounting holds managers responsible for ________.
    A. all costs charged to their subunit
    B. all costs charged to their subunit plus a share of company-wide fixed costs
    C. only the costs that they can control
    D. only the costs that they have personally approved

5. 12.1 Performance measures are only useful if ________.
    A. there are both controllable and uncontrollable factors to evaluate managers
    B. manager reward systems are designed by the chief financial officer prior to implementation
    C. all of the measures used are accounting numbers
    D. there is a baseline against which to compare the measured results

6. 12.2 Which of the following is not a characteristic of a good performance measurement system?
    A. timely
    B. consistent
    C. based on activities over which managers have no control or influence
    D. uses both long- and short-term performances and standards

7. 12.2 A good performance measurement system will align the goals of management with ________.
    A. the goals of the city manager and the mayoral staff
    B. the goals of the corporation, and both parties will benefit
    C. the priorities of the stockholders as listed at the annual meeting
    D. the investment department's response to the annual audit
652                                                                               Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures

8. 12.2 What should an organization do if performance measures change?
    A. Make sure that the manager being evaluated is aware of the measurement change, as this may affect
          his or her decision-making.
    B. Make sure that the manager benefits without the corporation also benefitting.
    C. Make sure that there are significant overriding opportunities for each manager, if the manager is
          unaware of the change.
    D. Obtain customer surveys on the change before communicating the change to the manager.

9. 12.2 A good performance measurement system will include which of the following?
    A. short-term goals
    B. long-term goals
    C. short-term and long-term goals
    D. no goals at all

10. 12.2 Without proper performance measures, goal congruence is almost impossible to achieve and will
likely lead to ________.

    A. more stable targets
    B. decreased defects
    C. lost profits
    D. employees satisfied with the status quo

11. 12.3 Dixon Construction Materials has collected this information:

Based on this information, what is the EVA for the project?

    A. $100,000
    B. $10,000
    C. $450,000
    D. ($110,000)

12.     12.3 The cost of equity is ________.
    A.  the interest associated with debt
    B.  the rate of return required by investors to incentivize them to invest in a company
    C.  the weighted average cost of capital
    D.  equal to the amount of asset turnover

13. 12.3 Which of the following measures the profitability of a division relative to the size of its investment
in capital assets?

    A. residual income (RI)
    B. sales margin
    C. return on investment (ROI)
    D. economic value added (EVA)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures                                                 653

14. 12.3 The capital structure of Ridley Enterprises is: Debt 40%, Equity 60%. The cost of debt is 13%, and the
cost of equity is 16.5%. What is the weighted average cost of capital for Ridley Enterprises?

    A. 14.4%
    B. 15.1%
    C. 16.2%
    D. 13.8%

15. 12.3 Calculate the ROI for Gardner Chemical given the following information:

A. 25%
B. 24%
C. 60%
D. 40%

16.     12.4 Which of the following statements is false?
    A.  The four dimensions of performance that are considered in a balanced scorecard are financial,
        customer, internal process, and learning and growth
    B.  A balanced scorecard will include qualitative and quantitative measures.
    C.  Stakeholders cannot include stockholders.
    D.  A balanced scorecard is the compatibility between personal goals and the goals of the organization.

17.     12.4 The metrics based on nonfinancial information are known as ________.
    A.  quantitative factors
    B.  qualitative factors
    C.  stakeholders
    D.  stockholders

18.     12.4 The metrics based on financial numbers produced by the accounting system are ________.
    A.  quantitative factors
    B.  qualitative factors
    C.  stakeholders
    D.  stockholders

19. 12.4 People affected by decisions made by a company, including investors, creditors, employees,
managers, regulators, customers, suppliers, and laypeople, are known as ________.

    A. quantitative factors
    B. qualitative factors
    C. stakeholders
    D. stockholders

20.     12.4 The owners of company stock are ________.
    A.  quantitative factors
    B.  qualitative factors
    C.  stakeholders
    D.  stockholders
654                                                                               Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures

     Questions

1. 12.1 Why might a manager focused solely on accounting numbers miss opportunities for future
benefits?

2. 12.1 Is there a way to prevent managers from focusing on accounting measures as performance
measures?

3. 12.1 Should an organization focus on controllable or uncontrollable factors to effectively implement a
successful performance measurement system? Explain your answer.

4. 12.1 What are the components of a strategic plan? Find one of these components for the company you
work for and share (if you are not currently employed, use the college you attend).

5. 12.1 What are the four types of centers and their corresponding responsibilities?

6. 12.2 What would be wrong with using two points of data in a performance measurement system to tell a
company whether the amount of variation is normal or abnormal?

7. 12.2 Compare and contrast short- and long-term goals for a company. Give an example of each, and
explain why they are important for performance measurement systems.

8. 12.2 Can a short-term goal also be a long-term goal? Where is the division, and why is it important for an
employee to understand whether the goal is short or long term?

9. 12.2 What does goal congruence mean? Provide an example with your explanation.

10. 12.2 What are the six characteristics of a good performance measurement system?

11. 12.3 What is EVA and why is it superior to other performance measures?

12. 12.3 What are the drawbacks to ROI? Give examples of each.

13. 12.4 Describe. the history and purpose of the balanced scorecard.

14. 12.4 What are the characteristics of successful balanced scorecards?

     Exercise Set A

EA1. 12.1 For the following situations, identify whether the description is probably a centralized or
decentralized organization.

    A. Seaside Furniture, a small builder of side tables managed solely by its sole proprietor
    B. Harbor Marketing, which wants Advertising Team Leaders to be able to respond quickly to needs of

          potential clients so Team Leaders have the authority to make decisions about advertising and pricing
    C. Couture's Creations, with a single owner who manages the production, accounting, engineering, sales,

          and other administrative functions
    D. British Navy
    E. McDonalds franchise #3101 in Canton, Ohio
    F. United States Army

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures  655

EA2. 12.1 For the following descriptions state whether the cost is controllable or uncontrollable by
responsibility center managers.

    A. property tax of an existing manufacturing facility
    B. research and development of a product
    C. advertising of a product
    D. insurance cost of the existing manufacturing facility
    E. design of a product

EA3. 12.1 Identify the type of responsibility center (revenue center, cost center, profit center, or investment
center) for each of the following situations.

    A. the accounting department for Tubelite Inc.
    B. the Best Buy in Traverse City, Michigan
    C. the reservation department of Allegiant airlines
    D. the sales department of Four Winns
    E. the Kohl's store in Mount Pleasant, Michigan
    F. The Hershey Company
    G. Procter and Gamble
    H. the shoe department in the Kohl's store in Mount Pleasant, Michigan

EA4. 12.2 Sara has just taken a job as the middle school assistant principal for an area school district. Prior
to this, she was a teacher. She has received the following performance measurements for her first
administrative job. Her first order of business is to determine if these performance measurements are short-
term goals or long-term goals based on her individual situation. She has completed her administrative degree
but has not yet worked as an administrator. Identify each of the following goals as short term or long term.

    A. Conduct teacher walk-throughs/observations/evaluations for teachers of grades 6 and 7.
    B. Assist the district's mission in seeking to educate all youth in the school district.
    C. Train to become a building instructional leader. Act as building administrator in the absence of the

          principal.
    D. Attend meetings with building principals and the administrative team when called to do so.
    E. Engage all students in a meaningful way, and support teachers and staff in providing rigor and

          relevance. Success of school-wide discipline and attendance policies and enforcement depends on a
          combination of creativity and sound pedagogy while adhering to district, state, and federal law,
          guidelines, and regulations.
    F. Facilitate and supervise all federal- and state-mandated drills (fire, lockdowns, tornado, others).
    G. Dress professionally.
    H. Assist the building principal in all job duties and responsibilities.

EA5. 12.3 During the current year, Sokowski Manufacturing earned income of $350,000 from total sales of
$5,500,000 and average capital assets of $12,000,000. What is the sales margin?

EA6. 12.3 During the current year, Sokowski Manufacturing earned income of $350,000 from total sales of
$5,500,000 and average capital assets of $12,000,000.

    A. Based on this information, calculate asset turnover.
    B. Using the sales margin from the previous exercise, what is the total ROI for the company during the

          current year?

EA7. 12.3 Assume Skyler Industries has debt of $4,500,000 with a cost of capital of 7.5% and equity of
$5,500,000 with a cost of capital of 10.5%. What is Skyler's weighted average cost of capital?

EA8. 12.3 Why do managers want a high ROI, and how would they strive to increase their ROI?
656                                                                               Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures

EA9. 12.4 Classify each of the following performance measures into the balanced scorecard perspective to
which it relates: financial perspective, internal operations perspective, learning and growth perspective, or
customer perspective.

    A. Number of improved products
    B. Time from packaging to delivery or display
    C. Production costs
    D. Number of customer suggestions
    E. Sales mix revenues
    F. Number of repeat customers

  B Exercise Set B

EB1. 12.1 For the following situations identify whether the description is a centralized or decentralized
organization.

    A. the United States Navy
    B. Farah's Domino's franchise store
    C. Domino's Pizza
    D. Middie's Furniture, which is divided into separate operating units, such as living room, kitchen, flooring
    E. the local community college, which has a single payroll department, a single administrative

          headquarters, and a single human resources department since it "flattened" its organization structure
    F. Conner Corporation, which promotes managers from within the organization whenever possible and

          which has formal training programs for lower-level managers

EB2. 12.1 For the following descriptions, state whether the cost is controllable or uncontrollable by
responsibility center managers.

    A. advertising for a merchandiser
    B. corporate income taxes
    C. office supplies for a merchandiser
    D. donations to the Salvation Army
    E. insurance for delivery vehicles

EB3. 12.1 Identify the type of responsibility center (revenue center, cost center, profit center, or investment
center) for each of the following situations.

    A. the legal department for Avon Manufacturing
    B. the Macy's store in Mansfield, Ohio
    C. the food and beverage division of the Best Western
    D. the marketing department of the Hershey Company
    E. the Walmart #5030 on Central Avenue in Toledo, Ohio
    F. Apple's Braeburn Capital Inc., where most of Apple's billions of dollars are invested
    G. Zappo's department store
    H. the men's clothing department in the Walmart #5030 in Toledo, Ohio

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures  657

EB4. 12.2 Padma completed her doctoral degree and has taken a position as an assistant professor at a
local university. She was given the following performance measures for her new position. Identify whether
these goals are long or short term.

    A. Interact in a fair and impartial way with students.
    B. Promote and access student academic achievement.
    C. Counsel students within the norms of society and the regulations of the college.
    D. Motivate students.
    E. Effectively plan and organize lectures and labs in accordance with the college course outlines.
    F. Report class attendance in accordance with the college policy and procedure.
    G. Serve on academic committees as assigned.
    H. Make progress toward tenure necessary at her university.

EB5. 12.3 During the current year, Plainfield Manufacturing earned income of $845,000 from total sales of
$9,350,000 and average capital assets of $13,500,000. What is the sales margin?

EB6. 12.3 During the current year, Plainfield Manufacturing earned income of $845,000 from total sales of
$9,350,000 and average capital assets of $13,500,000. Using the sales margin from the previous exercise, what
is the total ROI for the company during the current year?

EB7. 12.3 Assume Plainfield Manufacturing has debt of $6,500,000 with a cost of capital of 9.5% and equity
of $4,500,000 with a cost of capital of 11.5%. What is Tyler's weighted average cost of capital?

EB8. 12.3 Though a high ROI is desired, what are some reasons that might lead to a low or decreased ROI?

EB9. 12.4 Classify each of the following performance measures into the balanced scorecard perspective to
which it relates: financial perspective, internal operations perspective, learning and growth perspective, or
customer perspective.

    A. Employee satisfaction surveys
    B. Units of waste per production process, uniformity of products and inventory control
    C. Number of energy-efficient bulbs replaced
    D. Management training course certificates awarded
    E. Divisional profit
    F. Number of customer referrals
658                                                                               Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures

     Problem Set A

PA1. 12.1 Match each of the following with its appropriate term.

A. Controllable  i. This is the part of an organization in which management is evaluated based on the
factors          ability to contain costs; the manager primarily has control only over costs.
B. Cost center
                 ii. This means to align the goals of the business with the personal goals of the
C. Metric        manager.

D. Goal          iii. These components of the organization are components for which the manager is
congruence       responsible and can control.
E. Investment
center           iv. This is the means to measure something such as a goal or target.
F. Performance
measurement      v. This is a system that evaluates management in a way that will link the goals of the
system           corporation with those of the manager.

                 vi. For this center, management is responsible for revenues, costs, and assets and is
                 evaluated based on these three components.

PA2. 12.1 Florentino Allers is the production manager of Electronics Manufacturer. Due to limited capacity,
the company can only produce one of two possible products:

      · An industrial motherboard with a 75% probability of making a profit of $1 million and a 25% probability
          of making a profit of $150,000

      · A regular motherboard with a 100% chance of making a profit of $710,000

Florentino will get a 20% bonus from his department. Florentino has the responsibility to choose between the
two products and is more of a risk-taker, more so than most of the top management at Electronics
Manufacturer.

    A. Which option is Florentino more likely to choose and why?
    B. Which option would the company be more likely to choose and why?
    C. What changes should the company make to Florentino's compensation to avoid unnecessary risks?

PA3. 12.3 Macon Mills is a division of Bolin Products, Inc. During the most recent year, Macon had a net
income of $40 million. Included in the income was interest expense of $2,800,000. The company's tax rate was
40%. Total assets were $470 million, current liabilities were $104,000,000, and $72,000,000 of the current
liabilities are noninterest bearing. What are the invested capital and ROI for Macon?

PA4. 12.3 Jefferson Memorial Hospital is an investment center as a division of Hospitals United. During the
past year, Jefferson reported an after-tax income of $7 million. Total interest expense was $3,200,000, and the
hospital tax rate was 30%. Total assets totaled $70 million, and non-interest-bearing current liabilities were
$22,800,000. The required rate of return established by Jefferson is equal to 18% of invested capital. What is the
residual income of Jefferson Memorial Hospital?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures                                               659

PA5. 12.4 Crawford's Books and Things has a traditional bookstore housed downtown Charlotte. The store
has been there forty years, and many customers love the fact that they can hold the books in their hands and
browse the offerings. Crawford's just started an online book division for people who like to order books
online.

EVA for the Charlotte store is about $13 million, while EVA for the online division shows a value of -$2.2 million.

    A. Explain why it might be better to evaluate the online division using a balanced scorecard.
    B. Suggest two measures for the customer dimension that would be appropriate for the online division

          and two measures for the internal processes dimension of the balanced scorecard that would be
          appropriate for the online division.

PA6. 12.4 Coral Creations has strategic plans that call for rapid growth, a limited number of units for each
design to enhance exclusivity, designs for the perfect fit, on-time delivery to customers, retention of highly
trained employees with innovative skills, and excellent inventory control.

    A. Suggest one performance measure for each dimension of the balanced scorecard for Coral Creations.
    B. Take one of your measures and discuss the linkage it has to multiple strategies in Coral's plan.

  B Problem Set B

PB1. 12.1 Match each of the following with its appropriate term:

A.              i. The decisions and outcomes over which a manager does not have control
Performance
measures

B. Profit       ii. That part of an organization in which management is evaluated based on the ability to
center          generate revenues; the manager primarily has control only over revenues

C.              iii. The part of an organization in which management is evaluated based on the ability to
Responsibility  generate profits because the manager has control over both revenues and costs
accounting

D. Revenue      iv. A broad vision of how a company will be in the future
center

E. Strategic    v. A system that collects and reports data for which a manager has responsibility
plan

F.              vi. The metrics used to evaluate a specific attribute of a manager's role
Uncontrollable
factors
660                                                                               Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures

PB2. 12.1 Oleg Markov is the production manager of NASA Solvents. Due to limited capacity, the company
can only produce one of two possible products:

      · an industrial concentrated solvent with a 15% probability of making a profit of $1 million and an 85%
          probability of making a profit of $200,000

      · a household diluted solvent with a 100% chance of making a profit of $310,000

Oleg will get a 20% bonus from his department. Oleg has the responsibility to choose between the two
products and is more risk averse than most of the top management at NASA Solvents.

    A. Which option is Oleg more likely to choose and why?
    B. Which option would the company be more likely to choose and why?
    C. What changes should the company make to Oleg's compensation to encourage managers to take

          appropriate risks

PB3. 12.3 Evaluate the two departments for Moxie Products.

Compare the year's performance of the two departments in terms of ROI and RI. Which department has
created the most wealth for Moxie shareholders in the past year?

PB4. 12.3 Banyan Industries has two divisions, a tax rate of 30%, and a minimum rate of return of 20%.
Division A has a weighted average cost of capital of 9.5% and is looking at a new project that will generate a
profit of $1,200,000 from a machine that costs $4,000,000. Division B has a weighted average cost of capital of
9.5% and is looking at a new project that will generate a profit of $1,350,000 from a machine that costs
$5,000,000.

    A. Calculate the EVA for each of Banyan's divisions.
    B. Calculate the RI for each of Banyan's division.
    C. If Banyan uses EVA to evaluate the projects, which division has the better project and by how much?
    D. If Banyan uses RI, which division has the better project and by how much?
    E. What are some of the reasons for the similarity or difference that you found in the use of EVA versus

          RI?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures                                         661

PB5. 12.4 Forty years ago, Vinfen was founded as a nonprofit company by psychiatrists and social workers
at the Massachusetts Mental Health Center and Harvard Medical School to help people with psychiatric
conditions transition to group homes for community living. Vinfen's strategy map for fiscal 2006 shows how it
is building from its mission to accelerating organizational learning and elevating agency performance through
its balanced scorecard perspectives to bring value to the customer supported by operational excellence.[5] The
following are elements in the balanced scorecard and the four key perspectives. Match the elements with the
correct perspectives.

A. Improve organizational trust and teamwork                    i. Financial perspective
B. Strengthen government engagement                             ii. Learning and growth perspective
C. Deliver quality services to special populations              iii. Internal perspective
D. Achieve financial stability                                  iv. Customer perspective
E. Increase public awareness and visibility
F. Contribute to human services research and innovation
G. Improve efficiency and effectiveness of contracting process
H. Build professional competencies that support strategy
I. Develop and implement an integrated information system
J. Deliver services consistent in value and quality

     Thought Provokers

TP1. 12.1 What combination of quantitative factors and qualitative factors would you like your potential
employer to use as a performance management system? Explain your answer.

TP2. 12.2 Josh O'Shea is the manager of the Cardiovascular/Respiratory Laboratory. This department is
responsible for measuring blood gases, performing respiratory treatments, and distributing automated IV
equipment. As a manager, Josh hires and trains personnel, prepares his departmental budget, and maintains
the personnel schedule. Josh recommends equipment needs for the department, but he may be overruled in
the acquisition process. Josh and his departmental personnel are paid for the professional credentials they
hold, earn, and maintain and are reimbursed by the hospital for any approved training or professional
credentials they acquire. Josh must use the equipment, reagents, and supplies provided to him from central
purchasing. Based on this information, what incentives do you see as those that will motivate Josh as part of
the hospital team, and why? Which incentives will be demotivating, and why?

5 https://www.vinfen.org
662                                                                               Chapter 12 Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures

TP3. 12.2 Kanye Achebe just became the operations manager of Weston Transportation. Weston transports
large crates for online companies and transports containers overseas.

Kanye would like to evaluate each divisional manager on a basis similar to segmental reporting required by
generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) financial statements contained in annual reports. These data
include a presentation of net sales, operating profit and loss before and after taxes, total identifiable assets,
and depreciation for segment reported. Kanye thinks that evaluating business division managers by the same
criteria as the total company is appropriate.

    A. Explain why you think the chief financial officer (CFO) disagrees and tells Kanye that publicly reporting
          information might demotivate managers.

    B. For better evaluation of the managers, what type of information should Kanye propose that the CFO
          might accept?

TP4. 12.3 Which of the performance measures--ROI, RI, or EVA--is best, and why? Explain your answer
thoroughly.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
    13

              Sustainability Reporting

Figure 13.1 Choices. Choices about where to invest and even where to work can be difficult if you can only
evaluate options on the financial information they provide. (credit: modification of "Girl Crossroads Choice" by
"Pixource"/Pixabay, CC0)

 Chapter Outline

  13.1 Describe Sustainability and the Way It Creates Business Value
  13.2 Identify User Needs for Information
  13.3 Discuss Examples of Major Sustainability Initiatives
  13.4 Future Issues in Sustainability

      Why It Matters

   Gina studies supply chain management at a local university. Last summer, she worked at a manufacturing
   plant for a major auto manufacturer. She enjoyed her experience and learned quite a bit about the
   manufacturing and supply chain process, and she spent a significant amount of time on the production floor
   learning how the supply chain process affects the assembly of the vehicles. Gina felt she was well paid and she
   liked her colleagues. This summer, she has a comparable position and compensation with a different auto
   manufacturer. She is curious to see how the two companies compare.
   One of the first things Gina notices is the number of reminders posted around the plant to save and conserve
   energy. There are procedures in place to save energy when machines are idle, and sensors that turn off lights
   when no one is in the offices or break room. Gina also heard fellow employees talking about taking paid time
   off to volunteer at local charities. Her supervisor has asked her to be one of the speakers at presentations
   given throughout the year at local schools as part of a project to promote school-age girls entering technical
   fields. She also visited the company's research and development symposium and learned how the company is
   trying to improve fuel efficiency and move away from cars that use fossil fuels.
664                                                                               Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting

Gina never noticed initiatives like these at her position the prior summer. And though she enjoyed that job,
she feels better about the current manufacturer because she realizes the company is trying to accomplish
goals in addition to making money for its shareholders. Her current employer takes steps to promote the well-
being of its employees, the community, and the environment. When Gina asks one of her professors about the
difference, she learns that her current employer is more involved in corporate social responsibility and the
company's sustainability reports will provide more information. Gina decides to learn more about
sustainability reporting.

 13.1 Describe Sustainability and the Way It Creates Business Value

A primary goal of any business is to maximize shareholder or owner wealth and thus continue operating into
the future. However, in making decisions to be profitable and to remain in business into the future, companies
must think beyond their own organization and consider other stakeholders. This approach is a major goal of
sustainability, which is meeting the needs of the present generation without compromising the ability of
future generations to meet their own needs.[1] Another concept that is sometimes associated with
sustainability is corporate social responsibility (CSR), which is the set of actions that firms take to assume
responsibility for their impact on the environment and social well-being. CSR can be used to describe the
actions of an individual company or in comparing the actions of multiple corporations.

Just as individuals often make conscious decisions to recycle, reuse items and reduce their individual negative
effect on the environment, so too do most businesses. Corporations affect the world on many different
levels--economic, environmental and social--and many corporations have realized that being good stewards
of the world can add value to their business. Companies increase their value, both financial and nonfinancial,
in the eyes of consumers and shareholders by heralding their efforts to be good citizens of the globe and the
results of those efforts. It is important to note that a corporation's social and environmental influence is often
affected by government policy, both local and federal, and sometimes even internationally through
agreements and treaties. The global effort to limit climate change is an example of this influence.

In December 2015, 196 nations adopted the Paris Climate Agreement, a historic plan to work together to
limit the increase of global temperatures to 1.5 °C. The Agreement aims to help delay or avoid some of the
worst consequences of climate change within a system of transparency and accountability in which each
nation can evaluate the progress of the others.

In June 2017, President Trump announced his intention that the United States withdraw from the Agreement.
Five months later, Syria ratified the Agreement, leaving the United States as the only non-participating country
in the world.

By November 2017, however, a coalition of 20 U.S. states and 50 cities, led by California governor Jerry Brown
and former New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg, had formed (Figure 13.2). During the 23rd UN Climate
Change Conference in Germany, the members of this coalition pledged to continue supporting the
Agreement. They aim to do this by reducing their carbon output, which is a measure of their carbon dioxide
and other greenhouse gas emissions into the atmosphere.

In addition to these commitments at the local, state and national level, many U.S. companies have also
committed to reducing their carbon output, including Walmart, Apple, Disney, Tesla, and Facebook.

1 Brundtland Commission. Our Common Future. 1987.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting  665

Figure 13.2 Governor Jerry Brown on Climate Change. California Governor Jerry Brown speaks at the UN
Climate Change Conference in Paris, France in 2015. (credit: modification of "Jerry Brown, Gouverneur de
Californie sur le Pavillon France" by COP PARIS/Wikimedia Commons, CC0)

The fact that these companies and others are run by CEOs whose primary objective is to make a profit does
not mean they live in a vacuum, unaware of their effects on the larger world. As mentioned, responsible
companies today are concerned not only about their economic performance, but also about their effects on
the environment and society. Recall, corporate social responsibility (CSR) is the set of steps that firms take to
bear responsibility for their impact on the environment and social well-being. Even if some managers are not
personally guided by these motivations, good corporate citizenship makes good business sense.

Historically, companies disclosed financial information in their annual reports to allow investors and creditors
to assess how well managers have allocated their economic resources. The public usually learned little about a
company's hiring practices, environmental impact, or safety record unless a violation occurred that was
serious enough to make the news. Companies that did not make the news were simply assumed to be doing
the right thing.

Today, however, as a consequence of social media platforms such as Facebook and Twitter, the public is more
aware of corporate behavior, both good and bad. Investors and consumers alike can make financial decisions
about firms that align with their own values and beliefs. Management decisions perceived to be detrimental to
society can quickly put companies in a bad light and affect sales and profitability for many years. Thus, users of
financial reports increasingly want to know whether businesses are making appropriate decisions not only to
increase shareholder wealth, but also to sustain the business, and minimize any future negative effects on the
environment and the citizens of the world. This management goal is called business sustainability. The
number of companies reporting sustainability outcomes has grown over the last two decades. This growth has
made this non-financial component of reporting increasingly important to accountants.

Sustainability Reporting

A sustainability report presents the economic, environmental and social effects that a corporation or
666  Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting

organization was responsible for during the course of everyday business. Sustainability reporting aims to
respond to the idea that companies can be held accountable for sustainability. In 1987, the former Norwegian
Prime Minister, Gro Harlem Brundtland, chaired a World Commission on Environment and Development to
both formulate proposals and increase understanding of and commitment to environment and development.
The resulting Brundtland Commission Report laid the groundwork for the concept of sustainable
development (Figure 13.3). This was defined as "development that meets the needs of the present without
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs."[2]

Figure 13.3 Sustainable Energy. Sustainable development means meeting the needs of the present without
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. (credit: modification of "Shepherds
Flat Wind Farm 2011" by Steve Wilson/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 2.0)

With that in mind, the early adopters of sustainability reporting attempted to construct a framework that could
convey the good stewardship of companies, primarily their social and environmental effects. Since then,
sustainability reporting has evolved to include the ways in which sustainability practices of the company
benefit its profitability and longevity.
Indeed, adopting sustainable business practices may benefit business in many ways. Companies can:

  · save money by using less water and energy and reducing or recycling business waste
  · reduce insurance costs by limiting their exposure to environmental risks
  · attract investors who prefer to work with businesses that are environmentally and socially responsible
  · reduce social risks, such as racial or gender discrimination
  · improve customer sales and loyalty by enhancing reputation and brand value
  · reduce the possibility of potentially costly regulation by proactively undertaking sustainability initiatives
  · attract and retain employees who share similar values
  · strengthen their relationship with the community
  · contribute to improving environmental sustainability
In short, sustainability reporting has evolved to describe both how the company's practices contribute to the
social good and how they add value to the company, which ultimately provides better returns to its investors.
The need for improved reporting by corporations on sustainability developed over time. The Union Carbide,

2 NGO Committee on Education. "Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development: Our Common Future." UN Documents:
Gathering a Body of Global Agreements. August 4, 1987. http://www.un-documents.net/wced-ocf.htm

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting  667

Nestlé, and Johnson and Johnson cases are examples of corporate crises that contributed to the development
of better sustainability reporting. And though each of these cases involved a negative public response toward
the company, this led to a broader shift in business practices, changing how other corporations handle similar
challenges.

Historical Drivers of Contemporary Sustainability Reporting

Much of the drive to adopt sustainability reporting has resulted from the publicity surrounding corporate
responses to specific crises. The three featured cases, on Union Carbide, Nestlé, and Johnson & Johnson, look
at events that had such an impact on communities and the social conscience that they have contributed to
shaping modern sustainability reporting and what society's expectations of corporations are today. We first
look at Union Carbide, whose actions, or lack of action, resulted in the deaths of thousands of impoverished
Indians who lived in the shanty communities next to a facility of the U.S.-owned conglomerate. This case
highlighted the power disparity between corporations and poor individuals and became a stark emblem of
corporate disregard for the human toll of the quest for profit. We then consider the long running campaign
against Nestlé Corporation, ongoing since the early 1980s. We will examine what Nestlé has attempted to do
to mitigate the perception of exploitation which, some activists argue, is still a superficial response. Finally, we
look at the reaction by Johnson & Johnson to the Tylenol poisoning crisis, which, while not of their making, is
seen as a rapid and responsible response to ensure the well-being of the community, even if it initially came at
considerable financial cost to the company.

Union Carbide

A few hours before midnight on December 2, 1984, at the Union Carbide pesticide plant in Bhopal India,
pressure and heat built up in a tank that stored methyl isocyanate (MIC). Within two hours, approximately 27
tons[3],[4] of MIC had escaped into the surrounding community, exposing more than 600,000[5] people to the
deadly gas cloud. By the next day, 1,700 people were dead. The official toll eventually rose to 3,598 dead[6] and
another 42,000 injured, although some accounts estimate that the incident was responsible for 16,000-20,000
deaths.[7]

Though the plant had ceased production a couple of years earlier, the plant still contained vast quantities of
dangerous chemicals. There was still 60 tons of deadly MIC in tanks at the plant, and proper maintenance of
the tanks and the containment systems was necessary. It was later discovered that all the safety systems put
into place failed due to lack of maintenance after the plant closed.[8]

Within days of the explosion, Warren Anderson, the CEO of Union Carbide, arrived in India, was arrested and
released, and then immediately flew out of the country. Although he was subsequently charged with
manslaughter, he never returned to India to face trial.[9] Some of the criticisms of Union Carbide's handling of

3 The Bhopal Medical Appeal. "Union Carbide's Disaster." n.d. http://bhopal.org/what-happened/union-carbides-disaster/
4 Paul Cullinan. "Case Study of the Bhopal Incident." Environmental Toxicology and Human Health, Vol. I. Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems.
n.d. https://www.eolss.net/sample-chapters/C09/E4-12-02-04.pdf
5 Alan Taylor. "Bhopal: The World's Worst Industrial Disaster, 30 Years Later." The Atlantic. December 2, 2014. https://www.theatlantic.com/
photo/2014/12/bhopal-the-worlds-worst-industrial-disaster-30-years-later/100864/
6 Paul Cullinan. "Case Study of the Bhopal Incident." Environmental Toxicology and Human Health, Vol. I. Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems.
n.d. https://www.eolss.net/sample-chapters/C09/E4-12-02-04.pdf
7 The Bhopal Medical Appeal. "Basic Facts & Figures, Numbers of Dead and Injured, Bhopal Disaster." n.d. http http://bhopal.org/basic-facts-
figures-numbers-of-dead-and-injured-bhopal-disaster/
8 The Bhopal Medical Appeal. "Union Carbide's Disaster." n.d. http://bhopal.org/what-happened/union-carbides-disaster/
668  Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting

matters, both before and after the disaster, are:

  · A safety audit two years before had noted numerous problems at the plant, including several implicated
      in the accident.[10]

  · Before the incident, staff were routinely ordered to deviate from safety regulations and fined if they
      refused to do so.[11]

  · Employees discovered the leak around 11:30pm on December 2. However, they then decided to take a tea
      break and did not deal with the leak until two hours later.[12]

  · Two of the plant's main safety systems were out of action at the time of the accident; one of them had
      been inoperable for several weeks.[13]

  · Staffing had been cut from 12 operators a shift to six. Kamal K. Pareek, a chemical engineer employed by
      the plant later argued that it was not possible to safely run the closed plant with only six people.[14]

  · There were no public education programs to inform the surrounding community about what to do in an
      emergency,[15] and on the night of the leak, there was no public warning of the disaster. An external alarm
      was turned on at 12:50am but ran for only a minute before it was turned off.

  · Beginning at 1:15am, workers denied to local police that they were aware of any problems. They restarted
      the public warning siren at 2:15am and then contacted police to report the leak.[16]

Union Carbide asserts that a disgruntled employee sabotaged the plant by mixing water with the methyl
isocyanate to create a reaction. Some employees claimed that a worker lacking proper training was ordered by
a novice supervisor to wash out a pipe that had not been properly sealed. Although it was against plant rules,
this action may have started the reaction.[17]

Union Carbide's disgruntled-employee theory appeared to many to be an effort to deflect blame and deny
responsibility. Ultimately, the company agreed to pay the Indian Government $470 million in compensation to
be distributed to Bhopal residents,[18] and seven former employees were jailed for two years. In 2001, the
company was bought by Dow Chemical Company. Though Dow Chemical obtained the financial liabilities of
Union Carbide, Dow maintains that it did not assume legal responsibility for the prior actions of Union
Carbide.[19] More than thirty years later, many victims are still awaiting the compensation they were promised,
after having paid doctors and lawyers to prove their injuries. "In a way, they were fighting their own
government for adequate compensation, whereas the state should have fought with them against Union

9 Douglas Martin. "Warren Anderson, 92, Dies; Faced India Plant Disaster." New York Times. October 30, 2014. https://www.nytimes.com/2014/
10/31/business/w-m-anderson-92-dies-led-union-carbide-in-80s-.html
10 Juanita Stuart. "Union Carbide Bhopal Chemical Plant Explosion." Worksafe. 2015. https://worksafe.govt.nz/data-and-research/research/
role-of-information-management-disaster-prevention/#lf-doc-34129
11 Juanita Stuart. "Union Carbide Bhopal Chemical Plant Explosion." Worksafe. 2015. https://worksafe.govt.nz/data-and-research/research/
role-of-information-management-disaster-prevention/#lf-doc-34129
12 Stuart Diamond. "The Bhopal Disaster: How It Happened." New York Times. January 28, 1985. http://www.nytimes.com/1985/01/28/world/
the-bhopal-disaster-how-it-happened.html?pagewanted=all
13 Stuart Diamond. "The Bhopal Disaster: How It Happened." New York Times. January 28, 1985. http://www.nytimes.com/1985/01/28/world/
the-bhopal-disaster-how-it-happened.html?pagewanted=all
14 Stuart Diamond. "The Bhopal Disaster: How It Happened." New York Times. January 28, 1985. http://www.nytimes.com/1985/01/28/world/
the-bhopal-disaster-how-it-happened.html?pagewanted=all
15 Stuart Diamond. "The Bhopal Disaster: How It Happened." New York Times. January 28, 1985. http://www.nytimes.com/1985/01/28/world/
the-bhopal-disaster-how-it-happened.html?pagewanted=all
16 "The Bhopal Disaster." Chapter 8 in Health. n.d. http://cseindia.org/userfiles/THE%20BHOPAL%20DISASTER.pdf
17 Stuart Diamond. "The Bhopal Disaster: How It Happened." New York Times. January 28, 1985. http://www.nytimes.com/1985/01/28/world/
the-bhopal-disaster-how-it-happened.html?pagewanted=all
18 Business and Human Rights Resources Centre. "Union Carbide/Dow Lawsuit (re Bhopal)." n.d. https://business-humanrights.org/en/
union-carbidedow-lawsuit-re-bhopal
19 Dow. "Dow and the Bhopal Tragedy." n.d. https://www.dow.com/en-us/about-dow/issues-and-challenges/bhopal/dow-and-bhopal

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting  669

Carbide," says a representative of the one of the groups fighting for the victims' rights.[20]

Nestlé

Nestlé is the target of one of the longest-running consumer boycotts in modern history. Founded and
headquartered in Switzerland, the company recently became the largest food company in the world. While
there have been boycotts against a number of its products over the years, none has lasted as long as the baby
formula boycott.

The origins of the boycott go back to the mid-1970s, when consumer concerns arose about Nestlé's use of
aggressive marketing tactics to sell its baby formula in developing countries in Asia, Africa, and Latin America.
Initially new mothers were provided with free samples of formula to feed their babies, a common practice in
many hospitals throughout the world. But in developing countries, this led to two negative consequences for
mothers and their babies. First, once bottle feeding begins, the demand on the mother's body is reduced and
breast milk begins to dry up. Mothers in developing countries were often living in poverty and unable to afford
the cost of artificial infant food. Action groups argued that, in Nigeria, the cost of bottle feeding a three-
month-old infant was approximately 30% of the minimum wage, and by the time the child reached six months
old, the cost was 47%.[21]

A second consequence arose from the fact that preparation of infant formula required sterilized equipment
and clean water. Both clean water and sterilization were difficult to guarantee in developing nations where
mothers may not have understood the requirements for sterilization or may have lacked the fuel or electricity
to boil water. Lapses in preparing the formula led to increased risks of infections, including vomiting and
diarrhea that, in some cases, proved fatal. UNICEF estimated that formula-fed infants were 14 times more
likely[22] to die of diarrhea and four times more likely to die of pneumonia than breast-fed children. Advocacy
groups also argued that dehydration could result if mothers used too much formula and malnutrition could
occur if they used too little in an effort to save money.[23]

An active campaign against Nestlé ensued, and the company endures a backlash even today. One group
distributed a report, Nestlé Toten Babies ("Nestlé Kills Babies"), which a Swiss court found to be libelous.
Nonetheless, the judge warned Nestlé that perhaps it should change the way it did business if it did not want
to face such accusations.[24]

The boycott and negative publicity precipitated a long-running campaign by Nestlé to improve its image. The
company now explicitly states on its packaging that breastfeeding is best for babies and supports the World
Health Organization's recommendation that babies should be breastfed exclusively for at least the first six
months of life. It distributes educational materials for healthcare professionals and parents on the benefits of
breastfeeding and holds seminars on breastfeeding for the medical community. Nestlé established a global
Maternity Protection Policy that provides its own employees with extended maternity leave (up to six months)
and flexible work arrangements. It opened 945 breastfeeding rooms in India and another 1,500 in China in a
partnership with several public and private organizations, and it developed a breastfeeding room locator app

20 Nita Bhalla. "Victims Call for Justice 30 Years after Bhopal Disaster." Reuters. December 3, 2014. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-india-
bhopal-anniversary/victims-call-for-justice-30-years-after-bhopal-disaster-idUSKCN0JH1L620141203
21 Mike Muller. "The Baby Killer." War on Want. March 1974. http://archive.babymilkaction.org/pdfs/babykiller.pdf
22 Unicef. "Improving Breastfeeding, Complementary Foods, and Feeding Practices." May 1, 2018. https://www.unicef.org/nutrition/
index_breastfeeding.html
23 E. Ziegler. "Adverse Effects of Cow's Milk in Infants." Nestlé Nutrition Workshop Senior Pediatric Program. 2007 (60): 185-199.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17664905
24 Mike Muller. "Nestlé Baby Milk Scandal Has Grown Up but Not Gone Away." The Guardian. February 13, 2013.
https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/nestle-baby-milk-scandal-food-industry-standards
670  Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting

for mothers.[25] In those countries considered to be at higher risk for infant mortality and malnutrition, Nestlé
applies its own stringent policies, which they believe are stricter than national code and which were derived
from the World Health Organization's International Code of Marketing of Breast-Milk Substitutes.[26]
Meanwhile, debate about whether Nestlé is a good corporate citizen continues.

Johnson & Johnson

At 6:30 in the morning on Wednesday, September 29, 1982, twelve-year-old Mary Kellerman woke up feeling
sick. Her parents gave her some Tylenol and decided to keep her home from school. Within an hour Mary had
collapsed, and she was pronounced dead at 9:24. Within 24 hours another six people were dead, poisoned, like
Mary, by cyanide capsules in Tylenol bottles.

In the early 1980s, Tylenol was the leader in over-the-counter pain relief, and during the first three quarters of
1982 the product was responsible for 19% of Johnson & Johnson's profits. Then an unknown person replaced
Tylenol Extra-Strength capsules with cyanide-laced capsules and deposited the bottles on the shelves of at
least a half-dozen stores across Chicago.

On learning of the deaths, Johnson & Johnson reacted swiftly. CEO James Burke formed a seven-member
strategy team charged with answering two questions: "How do we protect the people?" and "How do we save
the product?" The first step was to immediately warn consumers through a national announcement not to
consume any type of Tylenol product until the extent of the tampering could be determined. All Tylenol
capsules in Chicago were withdrawn, and upon discovering two more compromised bottles, Johnson &
Johnson ordered a nationwide withdrawal of all Tylenol products. Less than a week had passed.

At the same time, the company established a toll-free number for consumers and another one for news
organizations that provided daily recorded updates about the crisis. Within two months, Tylenol was re-
launched with three-way tamper-proof packaging (Figure 13.4). The carton was securely glued, the cap was
wrapped with a plastic seal, and the bottle carried a foil seal. The company also began an extensive media
campaign emphasizing trust. In addition, other companies, not only in the pharmaceutical industry but in
other industries such as food production and packaging, began to implement the use of tamper proof or
double sealed packaging after the Tylenol incident.

25 Nestlé. "Supporting Breastfeeding." n.d. https://www.nestle.com/csv/impact/healthier-lives/baby-milk
26 Nestlé. "The Nestlé Policy and Procedures for Implementation of the WHO International Code of Marketing and Breast Milk Substitutes."
September 2017. https://www.nestle.com/asset-library/documents/creating%20shared%20value/nutrition/nestle_policy_who_code_en.pdf

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting  671

Figure 13.4 Tamper-Proof Packaging. Johnson & Johnson introduced tamper-proof packaging in an effort to
mitigate the impact of problems from the cyanide-laced pills scare of fall 1982. To date, the killer has not been
caught. (credit: "14418" by Debora Cartagena/CDC, Public Domain)

Since the crisis, the company's response has been lauded in business case studies and has formed the basis of
crisis communications strategies developed by researchers.[27] Ultimately, Johnson & Johnson spent more than
$100 million on the recall, an amount that might cripple some companies. Yet its share price returned to its
previous high within six weeks.[28] In fact, if you had invested $1,000 in Johnson & Johnson in September 1982,
it would have been worth almost $50,000 by late 2017. Today, the company ranks 35th in the Fortune 500, with
revenues of almost $76 million.[29]

These are three early examples of the impact on businesses of decisions made by management that had
unintended consequences or circumstances brought about by others that the company did not foresee
happening. Each of these instances weakened the sustainability of the corporation, at least temporarily. These
examples, as well as others, helped contribute to the CSR movement. Companies are concerned about the
effects of their products and practices on all stakeholders from a moral and ethical standpoint and want to be
socially responsible in addition to maintaining sustainability of their business. Certainly, there have been many
more examples of company responses to social and environmental impacts that have been either positively or
negatively received by stakeholders or those who have an interest or concern in the business. Nonetheless,
the cases examined demonstrate a range of the types of events and company responses that can affect both
the company's reputation and the society in which they operate in, sometimes for decades.

Initial Sustainability Reports

Following the Brundtland Report, financial statement preparers began to ask how they might communicate
not just the financial status of a company's operations but the social and environmental status as well. The

27 Department of Defense. "Case Study: The Johnson & Johnson Tylenol Crisis." n.d. https://www.ou.edu/deptcomm/dodjcc/groups/02C2/
Johnson%20&%20Johnson.htm
28 Judith Rehak. "Tylenol Made a Hero of Johnson & Johnson: The Recall That Started Them All." New York Times. March 23, 2002.
http://www.nytimes.com/2002/03/23/your-money/tylenol-made-a-hero-of-johnson-johnson-the-recall-that-started.html
29 Fortune. "Fortune 500 Full List." n.d. http://fortune.com/fortune500/list/
672  Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting

concept of a triple bottom line, also known as TBL or 3BL, was first proposed in 1997 by John Elkington to
expand the traditional financial reporting framework so as to capture a firm's social and environmental
performance. Elkington also used the phrase People, Planet, Profit to explain the three focuses of triple bottom
line reporting. By the late 1990s, companies were becoming more aware of triple bottom line reporting and
were preparing sustainability reports on their own social, environmental, and economic impact. Another
innovation was life-cycle or full-cost accounting. This reporting method took a "cradle to grave" approach to
costing that put a price on the disposal of products at the end of their lives and then considered ways to
minimize these costs by making adjustments in the design phase. This method also incorporated potential
social, environmental, and economic costs (externalities in the language of economics) to attempt to identify all
of the costs involved in production. For example, one early adopter of life-cycle accounting, Chrysler
Corporation, considered all costs associated with each design phase and then made adjustments to the
design. When its engineers developed an oil filter for a new vehicle, they estimated the material costs and
hidden manufacturing expenses and also looked at liabilities associated with disposal of the filter. They found
that the option with the lowest direct costs had hidden disposal costs that meant it was not the cheapest
alternative.[30]

Much of the early sustainability reporting movement was driven by stakeholder concerns and protests. For
example, throughout the 1990s, Nike drew accusations from consumers that its employees and
subcontractors' employees in developing countries were being subjected to inhumane working conditions.
The "sweatshop" charge has since been made against many companies that use off-shore manufacturing, and
some now pre-emptively respond by producing sustainability reports to assure stakeholders that they are
maintaining a good track record in human rights.

One of the earliest adopters of social reporting was The Body Shop, which released its first social report in
1995 based on surveys of stakeholders. BP (formerly British Petroleum) took a different approach, with a series
of case studies in social impact assessment and releasing its social report in 1997.

Early study into the hows of sustainability reporting led researchers[31] to suggest that some performance
indicators could be quantified. Figure 13.5 shows the sustainable product indicators identified by Fiskel and
colleagues with suggestions on how each element of economic output might also be measured from an
environmental or societal stance.

30 J. Fiksel, J. McDaniel, and D. Spitzley. "Measuring Product Sustainability." The Journal of Sustainable Product Design July, no. 6 (1998): 7-18.
31 J. Fiksel, J. McDaniel, and D. Spitzley. "Measuring Product Sustainability." The Journal of Sustainable Product Design July, no. 6 (1998): 7-18.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting  673

Figure 13.5 Sustainable Product Indicators. There are a number of approaches to dealing with economic
costs from an environmental and/or social impact perspective. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Fiskel's research suggests that different elements can be categorized as economic, environmental, or societal.
The study demonstrates how each element may have quantifiable costs or indicators that can be measured
and reported so that users will be able to consider how those inputs and outputs contribute to the entire life
cycle of a product. Although Fiskel's model is rarely reported today, the creation of quantifiable and
measurable social and environmental standards is the basis of the Sustainability Accounting Standards Board,
which uses an approach similar to Fiskel's model.

Current Examples of Sustainability in Business

The environment, human rights, employee relations, and philanthropy are all examples of topics on which
corporations often report. When you think of sustainability in business, environmental sustainability might be
the first area that comes to mind. Environmental sustainability is defined as rates of resource exploitation
can be continued indefinitely without permanently depleting those resources. If these resources cannot be
exploited indefinitely at the current rate, then the rate is not considered sustainable. A recent focus of
environmental sustainability is climate change impacts. This focus has developed over the past three decades
(although some contributors to climate change, such as pollution, have been a concern for much longer.).
Climate change, in the context of sustainability, is a change in climate patterns caused by the increased levels
of carbon dioxide (CO2) in the atmosphere attributed mainly to use of fossil fuels. Companies are increasingly
expected to measure and reduce their carbon footprint, the amount of CO2 and other greenhouse gases they
generate, in addition to adopting policies that are more environmentally friendly. For example, according to
the sustainability report for Coca-Cola, in 2016 the company reduced the amount of CO2 embedded in the
containers that hold their beverages by 14%.[32] Such corporate policies to reduce their carbon footprint can
include reducing waste, especially of resources like water; switching to paperless record-keeping systems;
674  Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting

designing environmentally friendly packaging; installing low-energy lighting, heating, and cooling in offices;
recycling; and offering flexible working hours to minimize the time employees sit in traffic adding auto
emissions to the environment. Industries that use or produce non-renewable resources as sources of energy,
such as coal and oil, are significantly challenged to stay relevant in an era of new energy technologies like solar
and wind power.

   YOUR TURN

   Mars Inc.

   Read this article (https://openstax.org/l/11caa) by Stephen Badger, chair of Mars Inc. Then visit the Mars
   Inc. website (https://openstax.org/l/50global) and review the sustainability discussion under
   "Sustainable in a Generation Plan." Discuss four examples of sustainability that Mars is implementing.
   What type of cost outlays might a company expend for each of these examples? Can you explain what
   type of savings the company might have, now or in the future, by these investments and outlays?

   Solution

   Mars is implementing a number of endeavors. In their "Healthy Planet" category, they identify climate
   action, water stewardship, land use, and waste reduction. In "Thriving People," they identify endeavors
   toward increasing income, respecting human rights, and increasing opportunities for women. In their
   "Nourishing Wellbeing" category, they identify product improvement, responsible marketing, and food
   safety and security. The company might make significant expenses or investments into each of the
   sustainability measures in the short term. Responses should provide examples of the type of programs
   that the company implements. For example, under Climate Plans, Mars discusses GHG emissions
   reductions targets of 67% by 2050 from 2015 levels. In reducing emissions, the company also explains
   that by improving raw material production practices, they can increase their efficiencies which should
   eventually lower costs. The company may make substantial savings by investments into energy reduction
   or water management.

The concept of sustainability in business also applies to a company's human rights and employee relations
records. From an employee relations perspective, businesses that are willing to demonstrate that they are
good corporate citizens endeavor to maintain sound working conditions to ensure their workplaces are safe,
ergonomically appropriate, and healthy even if this means going above and beyond the rules and regulations
set by local authorities. For example, good corporate citizens choose not to use child labor even in countries
where it is accepted and choose to provide a working environment that exceeds local minimum standards for
safety and cleanliness. Also, issues such as pay and job promotion fairness across genders, race and religion,
otherwise known as equity issues, are also examined to ensure there are no inequities. For example, gender
equity would exist when women are paid the same as men if they are performing the same duties. By other
equity measures, a person would not be denied employment or equal pay simply because of their race or
religion.

Firms may also implement parental leave policies and flexible or remote work hours to improve the morale
and productivity of employees with families. A number of organizations also offer health and wellness groups

32 The Coca-Cola Company. "Infographic: 2016 Sustainability Highlights." n.d. https://www.coca-colacompany.com/stories/
2016-sustainability-highlights-infographic

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting                                                                                                 675

and healthy vending and cafeteria options for employees.

Companies may also promote sustainability through philanthropic endeavors, or charitable giving. While
charitable giving is responsible, it is only sustainable if the money given improves or alleviates the underlying
issue for which the money is being given. Otherwise, the money is not being spent productively, and that goes
against sustainable business practices. To enhance the amount given to charities, many companies offer
matching programs wherein they will match charitable contributions made by employees. Some companies
also offer from two to five paid work days per year for employees to perform volunteer work. Many companies
also go further and contribute a portion of company earnings to charitable causes. Investors may not always
approve of the manner in which charitable funds are spent as they may prefer either that (1) the money be
given to different charitable causes than the ones chosen by the company or (2) may feel the money could be
more effective if applied to expansion and growth of the company. However, as most shareholders realize,
corporations take a significant role in funding charitable organizations, and many of these not-for-profit
organizations could not perform the services they provide without corporate funding. Table 13.1 provides an
example of philanthropic contributions by several public corporations. Table 13.2 shows a few of the best
places to work if you are looking for an employer that gives back to the community.

                                     Examples of Corporate Charitable Giving

Corporation        Amount                              Primary Causes Supported
                   Donated
Gilead
Sciences           $446.7 million    HIV/AIDS, liver diseases
Walmart
Wells Fargo        $301 million      Worker economic mobility, Feed America - anti-hunger campaign
                   $281.3 million
Goldman                              Part to local charities and part to national charities such as
Sachs              $276.4 million    Neighborworks
Exxon Mobil
                                     Their own projects called 10,000 Women and 10,000 Small Businesses

                   $268 million      Education, malaria prevention, and economic opportunity for women

Table 13.1 These companies were the top five charitable giving corporations in 2015.[33]

                                     Top Places to Work That Give Back

          Company                    Amount  Matches Employee           Gives Paid Days to Do Charitable
Salesforce                            Given           Giving                                Work

                                     $137 million Yes          56 hours

Table 13.2 These companies are considered the top five to work for if an employee is interested in community
involvement and charitable contributions.[34]

33 Caroline Preston. "The 20 Most Generous Companies of the Fortune 500." Fortune. June 22, 2016. http://fortune.com/2016/06/22/
fortune-500-most-charitable-companies/
34 Fortune. "The 50 Best Workplaces for Giving Back." February 9, 2017. http://fortune.com/2017/02/09/best-workplaces-giving-back/
676                                                                                         Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting

                      Top Places to Work That Give Back

          Company     Amount       Matches Employee                               Gives Paid Days to Do Charitable
                       Given                Giving                                                    Work
NuStar Energy
Veterans United Home  $8.5 million Yes                                            50 hours
Loan
Intuit                $7.1 million Yes                                            40 hours
Autodesk
                      $42 million  Yes                                            32 hours
                                                                                  48 hours
                      $20.4 million Yes

Table 13.2 These companies are considered the top five to work for if an employee is interested in community
involvement and charitable contributions.

Coca-Cola Corporation has a program designed to empower female entrepreneurs through e-learning
programs. The company launched the 5by20 initiative that aims to empower 5 million women entrepreneurs
across the company's value chain of producers, distributors, recyclers, and retailers around the world by 2020.
By the end of 2016, the program had enabled 1.75 million women through the program in 64 countries
globally.

Many corporations offer corporate giving programs by which employees are encouraged to participate in
volunteerism or match with in-kind donations. Companies such as Intel, Pacific Gas and Electric Company, GE,
General Mills, Intuit, Autodesk, and Salesforce have corporate giving programs that match dollar for dollar the
amounts contributed by their employees. For example, if an employee wishes to support their local school, it is
a registered tax exempt 501(c) (3) charity, and the employee donates $200, then the employer will match their
contribution. Additionally, companies may give their employees paid volunteer time. For example, Intuit gives
each of its employees 32 paid hours to help out at local organizations.

These volunteer hours can be used for many things, such as going to work in the local food bank for a few
hours, volunteering for a fundraiser they believe in, or even something as simple as allowing an employee to
participate in their child's school. These programs tend to be most effective when employees have input into
where they will donate, or how they will dedicate their time.

Business decisions that affect the environment, human rights, employee relations, and philanthropic activities
represent actions that are, hopefully, responsible and, at the same time, contribute to business sustainability,
which in turn adds value to the business.

Creating Business Value

In the past, firms increased business value by increasing revenue or reducing expenses. However, managers
now are realizing that some consumers are willing to pay more to support a company whose philosophy aligns
with their own values. If they believe a company is making a greater effort to reduce its carbon emissions than
its competitors are or that it looks after its workers and their communities, consumers will pay more for the
product or invest in the company because they believe the company is doing the right thing by the
environment or society. Many investors demonstrate these same principles. Companies have many ways to
inform investors and customers of their efforts to improve the three P's--planet, people and profit--as you

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting                                                                                              677

learned about in the discussion about the triple bottom line in the Initial Sustainability Reports section. While
not every company officially reports a triple bottom line, many companies report their efforts to improve their
impact on the planet and on people through various avenues such as in a formal corporate social
responsibility report, on their website, or even through their advertising. It is often difficult to translate the
effects of these efforts on the profits of the corporation; nonetheless, a company can often quantify the effects
of their actions to help the planet, employees, and communities in other ways. Next, let's examine efforts by a
few such companies and the results they have achieved.

Patagonia

For more than 30 years, the outdoor-clothing maker Patagonia has donated 1% of its annual sales or 10% of its
pre-tax profits, whichever is greater, to environmental organizations. In 2010, the company helped found the
Sustainable Apparel Coalition, whose members measure and score their environmental impact and then
report the results in the Higgs Index. The Higgs Index is a social and environmental performance index that
clothing industry executives use to make more sustainable decisions when sourcing materials and to protect
the well-being of factory workers, local communities, and the environment.[35]
In 2012, Patagonia became one of California's first B corporations. A B corporation is a benefit corporation,
which, although profit motivated, aims to make a positive impact on society, workers, the community, and the
environment.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   This website on B Corporations (https://openstax.org/l/50Bcorp) will help you learn more.

In 2013, Patagonia's founder, Yvon Chouinard, launched the $20 Million and Change fund, now called Tin Shed
Ventures,[36] which aimed to help start-up companies bring about positive benefit to the environment.[37] In
late 2017, Patagonia sued the U.S. government and President Donald Trump for the decision to undo federal
protections of public lands in Utah's Bears Ears and Grand Staircase-Escalante national monuments. The
company temporarily turned its homepage into a single graphic reading, "The President Stole Your Land."

Patagonia claims that it holds itself to a single cause: "Using business to help solve the environmental crisis."
The company has encountered some criticism from animal rights groups over its use of live-plucked feathers
and mulesing (a controversial surgical process to help prevent parasitic infection) of sheep, but it appears to
have taken action quickly to source down and wool according to strict animal welfare and land use
standards.[38]

Walmart's Greenhouse Gas Reduction Goals

In February 2010, Walmart announced its aim to eliminate 20 million metric tons of greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions from its global supply chain within five years. Environmentally, this would be equal to taking more

35 Sustainable Apparel Coalition. "The Higg Index." n.d. https://apparelcoalition.org/the-higg-index/
36 Tin Shed Adventures. "About." n.d. http://www.tinshedventures.com/about/
37 Yvon Chouinard. "Introducing Patagonia Works, A New Kind of Holding Company." Patagonia. May 6, 2013.
http://www.patagoniaworks.com/#index
38 Patagonia "Our Wool Restart." July 26, 2018. https://www.patagonia.com/blog/2016/07/our-wool-restart/; Patagonia. "Patagonia
Traceable Down." n.d. https://www.patagonia.com/traceable-down.html
678  Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting

than 3.8 million cars off the road for a year.[39] By 2015 the company announced that they had surpassed that
goal and had achieved a 28-million-ton reduction.

In April 2017, the company went several steps further and launched Project Gigaton, inviting their suppliers to
commit to reducing GHG emissions by a billion tons by 2030. This would be the equivalent of taking more than
211 million passenger vehicles off the roads for a year.[40] To do this, the company has initiated a number of
endeavors to achieve reduced GHG emissions. These include sourcing 25% of their total energy for operations
from renewable energy sources (energy that is not depleted when used) and aiming to increase this to 50%
by 2025.

The company also aims to achieve zero waste to landfill in key markets by 2025; by 2015, 75% of their global
waste was already diverted from landfills.[41]

Walmart has gone to great lengths to measure the environmental implications of its supply chains, which has
also saved the company money. One very simple example is the company's focus on selling more
concentrated detergents so that they can reduce the number of ships bringing the detergent from China to
the United States.[42]

Gravity Payments

Productivity, or the amount of output or income generated by an average hour of work, has improved 22%
from 2000 to 2014 in the US. Yet, during the same time, median wages rose only 1.8%, adjusted for inflation.[43]
CEOs have reaped more of the benefits of productivity gains and now earn about 271 times more than typical
workers (up from 59 times more in 1989).[44] CEO pay has been a controversial topic for many years. As leaders
of their organizations, CEOs affect not only the culture of the company but the direction as well. For example,
unethical CEOs can result in significant loss of shareholder wealth, which happened to Enron, Hewlett-Packard,
and Merrill Lynch.[45] Ethical CEOs can help guide the company to greater wealth by being cognizant of the role
they play within their corporation as well as in the world.

In April 2015, Dan Price, the co-founder and CEO of Seattle-based credit-card processing firm Gravity
Payments, decided to take a different path from other CEOs. Price announced he was slashing his own million-
dollar salary to $70,000 and raising the minimum salary for all his 120 employees, in stages, to $70,000 a
year.[46] After a few minor bumps in the road, mostly resulting from the attendant publicity, in the year after his
announcement, profits doubled, the firm's employee turnover reached a record low, and another 50
employees were added to deal with the increased business. Team members were able to afford to move closer

39 Walmart. "Walmart Announces Goal to Eliminate 20 Million Metric Tons of Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Global Supply Chain." February
25, 2010. https://corporate.walmart.com/_news_/news-archive/2010/02/25/walmart-announces-goal-to-eliminate-20-million-metric-tons-of-
greenhouse-gas-emissions-from-global-supply-chain
40 Walmart. "Walmart Launches Project Gigaton to Reduce Emissions in Company's Supply Chain." April 19, 2017. https://news.walmart.com/
2017/04/19/walmart-launches-project-gigaton-to-reduce-emissions-in-companys-supply-chain
41 Walmart. "Walmart Offers New Vision for the Company's Role in Society." November 4, 2016. https://news.walmart.com/2016/11/04/
walmart-offers-new-vision-for-the-companys-role-in-society
42 M.P. Vandenbergh and J.M. Gilligan. Beyond Politics: The Private Governance Response to Climate Change. (Cambridge, 2017), 198; Walmart.
"Walmart Completes Goal to Sell Only Concentrated Liquid Laundry Detergent." May 29, 2008. https://corporate.walmart.com/_news_/news-
archive/2008/05/29/wal-mart-completes-goal-to-sell-only-concentrated-liquid-laundry-detergent
43 Josh Bivens and Lawrence Mishel. "Understanding the Historic Divergence between Productivity and a Typical Worker's Pay." Economic
Policy Institute. September 2, 2015. http://www.epi.org/publication/understanding-the-historic-divergence-between-productivity-and-a-typical-
workers-pay-why-it-matters-and-why-its-real/
44 Economic Policy Institute. "Top CEOs Took Home 271 Times More Than the Typical Worker in 2016." July 20, 2017. https://www.epi.org/
press/top-ceos-took-home-271-times-more-than-the-typical-worker-in-2016/
45 Tomas Chamorro-Premuzic. "Are CEOs Overhyped and Overpaid?" Harvard Business Review. November 1, 2016. https://hbr.org/2016/11/
are-ceos-overhyped-and-overpaid
46 Gravity Payments. "$70K Minimum Wage Initial Results." n.d. https://gravitypayments.com/thegravityof70k/

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting  679

to their workplace, reducing commute time and the stress associated with it.[47]

Part of Price's motivation was a conversation with a friend who was worried about a $200 rent increase. He
remembered reading a 2010 study by Princeton behavioral economist Daniel Kahneman noting that people
were decidedly unhappier the less they earned below $75,000.[48] After the pay increase, Gravity saw employee
happiness, in terms of overall work place satisfaction levels increase significantly, although this tapered off
somewhat to average levels in the year after (Figure 13.6). Almost three years on, the company is still going
strong. Time will tell whether the "Price of Gravity" is a continued success.

Figure 13.6 Employee Happiness. Gravity Payments noticed an immediate spike in employee happiness after
employees' salaries were raised to at least $70,000 in 2015. Happiness settled at "average" levels in the
months afterward. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Grameen Bank

In 1974, Muhammad Yunus, then an Economics Professor in Bangladesh, began to lend small sums of money
at minimal or no interest to a few dozen local women who were basket weavers. Eliminating the high interest
charged by traditional lenders allowed the women to make enough profit to enlarge their businesses into
income-generating activities and lift themselves out of poverty.
Yunus continued helping poor entrepreneurs, usually women, and ultimately formalized his simple micro-
lending system by forming Grameen Bank in 1983. The bank now has 8.9 million borrowers, most often
women, across 81,399 villages[49] and has distributed more than US$19.6 billion in loans since its inception;
more than $17.9 billion has been repaid. The bank claims a rate of recovery of 99.25%.[50] Its profits are loaned
to other borrowers or go to fund local development to enrich the lives of the community (Figure 13.7).

47 Gravity Payments. "$70K Minimum Wage Initial Results." n.d. https://gravitypayments.com/thegravityof70k/
48 Paul Keegan. "Here's What Really Happened at That Company That Set a $70,000 Minimum Wage." Inc. November 2015.
https://www.inc.com/magazine/201511/paul-keegan/does-more-pay-mean-more-growth.html
49 Grameen Bank. "Introduction." January 2018. http://www.grameen.com/introduction/
50 Grameen Bank. "Monthly Report: 2017-11 Issue 455 in BDT." December 5, 2017. http://www.grameen.com/data-and-report/monthly-
report-2017-11-issue-455-in-bdt/
680                    Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting

Figure 13.7  Grameen Bank Model. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
license)

The average household income of Grameen's members is about 50% higher than that of a target group in a
control village, and 25% higher than that of non-members. While 56% of non-Grameen members live below
the poverty line, the bank's micro-financing efforts have meant that only 20% of members now live below that
line.[51]

Although it has not avoided controversy, the bank has won many awards, including the World Habitat Award
of 1997 and the 2006 Nobel Peace Prize (awarded jointly to the bank and to Yunus) for efforts to create
economic and social development through microcredit so that small entrepreneurs could break from the cycle
of poverty.

     LINK TO LEARNING

     You can learn more about the corporate social reporting of these companies online:

       · Patagonia corporate social reporting (https://openstax.org/l/50PatagoniaCSR)
       · Walmart corporate social reporting (https://openstax.org/l/50WalmartCSR)
       · Gravity Payments corporate social reporting (https://openstax.org/l/50GravityPayCSR)
       · Grameen Bank corporate social reporting (https://openstax.org/l/50GrameenCSR)

51 Arjun Bhaskar. "Microfinance in South India: A Case Study." Wharton Research Scholars, Scholarly Commons, Penn Libraries. April 2015
https://repository.upenn.edu/wharton_research_scholars/122/

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting                                                                          681

THINK IT THROUGH

Do Friedman's Ideas Stand the Test of Time?

In a 1970 New York Times Magazine (https://openstax.org/l/50business) article, economist Milton
Friedman argued that for a manager acting as an agent of the business owner (principal), "there is one
and only one social responsibility of business--to use its resources and engage in activities designed to
increase its profits so long as it stays within the rules of the game, which is to say, engages in open and
free competition without deception or fraud."
Given what we have learned about Earth's environment since this article was published, do you think
Friedman's statement that the "sole purpose of business is to make profits" is valid? Explain your
answer.

 13.2 Identify User Needs for Information

The concept of the triple bottom line expanded the role of reporting beyond shareholders and investors to a
broader range of stakeholders - that is, anyone directly or indirectly affected by the organization, including
employees, customers, government entities, regulators, creditors, and the local community. Naturally,
companies may feel their first obligation is to their present and potential investors. But it also makes good
business sense to consider other stakeholders who can affect the company's livelihood. Let's examine the
various users of sustainability reports and their particular information needs. Primary users would be
considered shareholders and investors, whereas secondary users would be customers, suppliers, the
community and regulators.

Shareholders

Many consider the company's shareholders to be its primary information user group. These equity investors
may be small single investors or they may be part of an institutional investment fund charged with investing
on behalf of its members. As shareholders they concern themselves with the future viability of the company
and want profits to be sustained or increased over the long term. Shareholders often use financial ratios, such
as earnings per share (EPS), return on investment (ROI), and the price/earnings ratio to evaluate the financial
health and the sustainability of financial growth of the company. Shareholders not only evaluate whether
there is current value in owning stock of the company but also whether there will continue to be value in
owning that company's stock. Otherwise the shareholder is likely to divest of their ownership interest.

One ratio that shareholders often use to measure the value of the company's stock relative to the company's
earnings is the price-earnings ratio, or P/E ratio. In the P/E ratio, the market price of the stock is divided by the
earnings per share of the company's stock. This ratio indicates the amount an investor is willing to pay for one
dollar of the company's earnings. For example, if a stock is trading at a P/E of 30, then this indicates investors
are willing to pay $30 for $1 of current earnings. A high P/E ratio indicates investors expect high future
earnings. A low P/E ratio has several interpretations but could indicate a company is undervalued. Many
investors use the P/E ratio as a measure of whether or not a stock should be purchased, but no single metric
682  Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting

should be used alone. In addition, the P/E ratio is only useful when comparing changes across time for a single
company to see trends or lack of trends. The P/E ratio is most useful if compared across companies within a
given industry sector. Most often, growth will vary widely between different sectors but will be more similar
within a particular sector. Investors buy and sell stock for many reasons, both financial and non-financial. They
can sell a stock due to lack of current growth in value or an expected drop in future earnings. They can also
buy a stock because the company participates in activities that the shareholder values, such as fair wages and
greenhouse emission reductions even if the company has a low P/E ratio. Let's look at an example of an
investment driven by more than just the company's current financial situation.

In 2008, Warren Buffett's MidAmerican Energy Company, a subsidiary of Berkshire Hathaway, bought a $230m
stake in BYD, a Chinese battery maker about to begin auto production.[52] Although the auto industry initially
ridiculed Buffet's investment in such a little- known company, he may well have the last laugh. Since 2008, the
company has evolved into the world's leading producer of electric cars, and its shares now trade at almost 10
times what MidAmerican paid for them. This increase in value reflects the market's optimism about the future
of the company based on the Chinese government's commitment to speeding up the phasing out of fossil
fuels.

The new ethical investing movement focuses on eliminating investments that conflict with shareholders'
values, such as dependence on environmentally damaging fossil fuels. The movement is growing each year. In
2016, ethical investments topped $8.7 trillion, up 33% from 2014, and they now account for 20% of all
investment under professional management.[53] Ethical investors are increasingly avoiding polluters, weapon
manufacturers, and tobacco companies as well as companies with a poor track record on human rights or
philosophies that do not align with a fund's religious tenets. Pension funds, such as the New York City Pension
Fund[54] have announced a move away from investing in companies in the fossil fuel industry, a move that will
put substantial pressure on these companies to seek out alternatives to the non-renewables business model.
On the opposite side of the country, the California Public Employees' Retirement System announced that it had
divested from most of its holdings in thermal coal stock.[55]

Investors are also increasingly looking to the future to evaluate whether a firm's stock price is sustainable.
Consider that, as the cost of renewable energy alternatives become cheaper, non-renewable resources
become less able to compete. That is, the price of the non-renewable commodity falls to a point where the
costs of extraction become greater than the price that can be obtained for the asset, and so the non-
renewable resource remains in the ground.[56] At this point, the value of the asset, the mine, is impaired, which
leads to a reduced share price.

For example, in mid-2017, Coal India, the largest coal-mining company in the world, announced that it would
close 96[57] of its 394 mines[58] by March 2018 because they would be no longer economically viable after the

52 Keith Bradsher. "Buffet Buys Stake in Chinese Battery Manufacturer." New York Times. September 29, 2008. https://www.nytimes.com/
2008/09/30/business/worldbusiness/30battery.html
53 Matt Whittaker. "Ethical Investing Continues to Grow." U.S. News and World Report. January 27, 2017. https://money.usnews.com/investing/
articles/2017-01-27/ethical-investing-continues-to-grow
54 William Neuman. "To Fight Climate Change, New York City Takes on Oil Companies." New York Times. January 10, 2018.
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/10/nyregion/new-york-city-fossil-fuel-divestment.html?
55 Randy Diamond. "CalPERS Reveals It Divested from Most Thermal Coal Companies." Pensions & Investments. August 7, 2017.
http://www.pionline.com/article/20170807/ONLINE/170809876/calpers-reveals-it-divested-from-most-thermal-coal-companies
56 M.K. Linnenluecke, J. Birt, J. Lyon, and B.K. Sidhu. "Planetary Boundaries: Implications for Asset Impairment." Accounting & Finance 55, no. 4
(2015).
57 IANS. "Coal India Could Close 53 Underground Mines This Fiscal." The Economic Times. September 12, 2018.
https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/indl-goods/svs/metals-mining/coal-india-could-close-53-underground-mines-this-fiscal/
articleshow/65783526.cms

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting  683

Indian Government announced it would cut its commitments to purchase coal after 2022.[59]

Investors, including ethical investors, must look to the future of their investments, buying shares that are
sustainable for the long term to provide better returns. A recent Harvard Business Review study showed that
socially responsible companies post higher profits and stock performance than those that were not focused on
social responsibility.[60] This result is supported by a Deutsche Bank analysis of more than 2,000 studies dating
back to the 1970's, 90% of which suggested that socially responsible investing gives better returns than
passive investing.[61]

   ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

   Millennials Are Demanding Sustainable Investments

   According to the Forum for Sustainable and Responsible Investment, a U.S.-based membership
   organization, "sustainable, responsible and impact investing is an investment discipline that considers
   environmental, social and corporate governance criteria to generate long-term competitive financial
   returns and positive societal impact."[62] Demand for this type of sustainable investments is being driven
   in a large part by millennials who prefer that their investments align with their personal beliefs and
   values. Ethical companies are seeing value in the millennial investors because "millennials are poised to
   receive more than $30 trillion of inheritable wealth."[63] Forward-looking companies need to develop an
   awareness of millennial values.

   Forward-looking companies and investment advisor companies also need to adapt to a sustainable
   investment environment. This changes the perspective of accounting because managers will need to
   look to other factors besides profits to guide management's business decisions. Management and
   accountants will need to look beyond just numbers, and this will require a change in culture, technology,
   and operational and financial reporting to investors, potential investors and stakeholders.

Lenders

Sustainability reports provide useful information for lenders. Lenders want to know that the company
borrowing from them does not have any going-concern risks that could affect its ability to repay the loan
(Figure 13.8). They want to know the company will not be sued for human rights violations at home or abroad,

58 Coal India. Annual Report and Accounts 2016-2017. n.d. https://www.coalindia.in/DesktopModules/DocumentList/documents/
Annual_Report_&_Accounts_2016_17_Deluxe_English_07112017.pdf
59 Harriet Agerholm. "World's Biggest Coal Company Closes 37 Mines as Solar Power's Influence Grows." Independent. June 21, 2017.
http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/asia/coal-india-closes-37-mines-solar-power-sustainable-energy-market-influence-pollution-
a7800631.html
60 MoneyShow. "Socially-Responsible Investing: Earn Better Returns from Good Companies." Forbes. August 16, 2017.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/moneyshow/2017/08/16/socially-responsible-investing-earn-better-returns-from-good-
companies/#7f73a8a1623d
61 MoneyShow. "Socially-Responsible Investing: Earn Better Returns from Good Companies." Forbes. August 16, 2017.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/moneyshow/2017/08/16/socially-responsible-investing-earn-better-returns-from-good-
companies/#7f73a8a1623d
62 US SIF. "SRI Basics." n.d. https://www.ussif.org/sribasics
63 Ernst & Young. Sustainable Investing: The Millennial Investor. 2017. https://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/ey-sustainable-investing-
the-millennial-investor-gl/$FILE/ey-sustainable-investing-the-millennial-investor.pdf
684  Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting

be unable to repay its loans because consumer boycotts have hurt its cash flow, or that they maintain valuable
property assets in high-risk areas. For example, after the 2017 Houston floods, a number of Houston-based
banks were examined to find that they had a high level of exposure in commercial real estate in Houston.[64]
This type of investment concentration in a single geographic area can be risky for lenders as a single disaster
can have a more damaging effect than on a portfolio spread over a broader geographical area.

Figure 13.8 Sustainable Investment. Lenders appreciate sustainable investment because it gives them
assurance that their loans will be repaid. (credit: modification of "Money Coin Investment" by
"nattanan23"/Pixabay, CC0)

Employees

Employees and potential employees want to know that the company they work for is concerned about their
safety and is an ethical organization. They want assurance that they will be fairly compensated and that all
employees have equal rights and opportunities, regardless of gender, race, religion, or sexual orientation.

Recent studies show that employees increasingly want to work for companies that align with their own values
and will be more loyal to those organizations. In 2016, 76% of millennials said that a company's social and
environmental commitments were considerations in employment, with 64% of millennials indicating that they
would not work for a company that did not have strong corporate social responsibility practices.[65]

Employees also report higher levels of satisfaction when their employers engage in corporate giving programs
that are aligned with employee values or are chosen by employees.[66] For example, Intel will donate $10 to an
educational institution, environmental program, or other community organization for every hour an employee
volunteers there. More than 40% of Intel's U.S. employees have donated time that totals hundreds of

64 Ely Razin. "As Harvey Leaves Houston Reeling, These Banks Are More Exposed Than Others." Forbes. August 31, 2017.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/elyrazin/2017/08/31/as-harvey-leaves-houston-reeling-these-banks-are-more-exposed-than-
others/#423dcb5e6355
65 Cone Communications (Whitney Dailey). "Three-Quarters of Millennials Would Take a Pay Cut to Work for a Socially Responsible Company,
According to the Research from Cone Communications." November 2, 2016. http://www.conecomm.com/news-blog/2016-cone-
communications-millennial-employee-engagement-study-press-release
66 America's Charities. "Facts and Statistics on Workplace Giving, Matching Gifts, and Volunteer Programs." n.d. https://www.charities.org/
facts-statistics-workplace-giving-matching-gifts-and-volunteer-programs

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting                                                                      685

thousands of volunteer hours.[67] Other firms have corporate giving programs that match employee's
charitable donations dollar for dollar.

Customers

Customers often have many choices about where to spend their hard-earned dollars. They want to know the
companies to which they give that money reflect their own values and beliefs. If a company is seen to be
uncaring about an issue, then customers may arrange campaigns to boycott the company (see the Nestlé
story for an example of such consumer activism).
A 2016 study by Unilever showed that 33% of consumers buy from brands they believe are doing social or
environmental good and that this presents a 966 billion (over 1.1 trillion $USD) opportunity for brands. As
such, it is important for a company to demonstrate their commitment to CSR, and sustainability reporting
offers a medium to do this.[68]

Governments and Regulators

Governments and regulators want to be able to see that a company is behaving responsibly. If they are
confident that it is, there is less need to design laws and regulations that might restrict the company even
more than if it undertook best-practice measures on its own. Many companies form industry alliance groups
that aim to implement best practices in trade, social responsibility, or environmental initiatives.

Community

The community at large also wants to know that the organization is behaving at the level of society's
expectations. This reflects the existence of a social contract, the expectation that companies will hold to an
unwritten contract with society as a whole. If a firm is undertaking actions that might harm society or that
reject its general values, community backlash may cost the firm dearly.
In summary, a company's accountability to a wider group of users is an element of stakeholder theory. This
theory presents a view that asserts a corporation has an obligation to groups beyond just its shareholders.

YOUR TURN

Identifying Stakeholders

Locate the sustainability report of a Fortune 500 company and read the management discussion in it.
Explain who you think the company considers its primary and secondary users. What information about
itself and its operations does the company attempt to convey to each audience? Do you think its choices
meet the information needs of these two groups of stakeholders? Why or why not?
Solution

67 Intel. "Giving Back: How Our Employees Make a Difference." n.d. https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/jobs/life-at-intel/usa/giving-
back.html
68 Unilever. "Report Shows a Third of Consumers Prefer Sustainable Brands." May 5, 2017. https://www.unilever.com/news/Press-releases/
2017/report-shows-a-third-of-consumers-prefer-sustainable-brands.html
686  Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting

     Invariably, the primary users will be shareholders and creditors. Secondary users would be customers,
     employees, environmental groups, the community and regulators. The strength or relevance of each
     user will be dependent on the type of business discussed in the response.

     ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

     Public Benefit Corporations

     Traditionally, standard American corporations consider their ultimate purpose as maximizing the profits
     of the shareholders. In the United States, directors of for-profit corporations recognize that one of their
     major goals is to maximize shareholder value. While corporations generally have the ability to engage in
     any legal activities, including those that are socially responsible, corporate decision-making must be
     justified in terms of creating shareholder value. Mission driven and other socially conscious businesses,
     impact investors, and social entrepreneurs are constrained by this inflexible legal framework that does
     not accommodate for-profit entities whose mission and impact is central to their business model.

     In response, the benefit corporation model has emerged, which "broadens the perspective of traditional
     corporate law by incorporating concepts of purpose, accountability and transparency with respect to all
     corporate stakeholders, not just stockholders."[69] Public benefit corporations expand the obligations of
     boards, requiring them to consider environmental and social factors, as well as the financial interests of
     shareholders. This gives directors and managers the legal protection to pursue a mission other than
     maximizing profit and consider the impact their business has on society and the environment.

 13.3 Discuss Examples of Major Sustainability Initiatives

In 2017, a KPMG report noted that 93% of the world's 250 largest companies by revenue produced corporate
responsibility reports. When looking at the top 100 companies in each of 49 countries, the report found an
underlying trend of 75% of companies that reported corporate responsibility and this was up from 18% only 15
years ago.[70] Given these figures, sustainability reporting is clearly responding to a need by investors, lenders
and other stakeholders to provide information beyond what financial reports can produce.
However, for these reports to be comparable and useful, there needs to be a standard that users can rely on.
Just as financial statements are produced using GAAP or IFRS, there is a need for some type of uniformity
within corporate social responsibility reporting. The non-mandatory nature of CSR reporting has made the
emergence of a single set of standards a challenge.
Three of the most well-known reporting frameworks are the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI), the Sustainability
Accounting Standards Board (SASB), and Integrated Framework. Each framework relies on materiality (how
significant an event or issue is to warrant its inclusion or discussion) as its basis of reporting, but each
describes it slightly differently.

69 Morris, Nicols, Arsht & Tunnel. "Understanding Delaware's Benefit Corporation Governance Mode." The Public Benefit Corporation
Guidebook. May 2016. http://news.mnat.com/rv/ff00272e4c8b3699806e25d24c48a286df5bf926
70 KPMG. The Road Ahead: The KPMG Survey of Corporate Responsibility Reporting 2017. 2017. https://assets.kpmg.com/content/dam/kpmg/xx/
pdf/2017/10/kpmg-survey-of-corporate-responsibility-reporting-2017.pdf

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting  687

Global Reporting Initiative (GRI)

In 1997, a not-for-profit organization called the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) was formed with the goal of
increasing the number of companies that create sustainability reports as well as to provide those companies
with guidance about how to report and establish some consistency in reporting (such as identifying common
themes and components for reports). The idea is that as companies begin to create these reports, they
become more aware of their impact on the sustainability of our world and are more likely to make positive
changes to improve that impact. According to GRI, 92% of the Global 250 produced sustainability reports in
2016.

Although businesses have been preparing reports using GRI standards for some time, in 2016, the GRI
produced its first set of global reporting standards,[71] which have been designed as modular, interrelated
standards. Every organization that produces a GRI sustainability report uses three universal standards:
foundation, general disclosures, and management approach (Figure 13.9). The foundation standard (GRI 101)
is the starting point and introduces the 10 reporting principles and explains how to prepare a report in
accordance with the standards. General Disclosures (GRI 102) is for reporting contextual information about
the organization and its reporting practices. Management Approach (GRI 103) is used to report how a firm
manages each of its material topics. Applying the materiality principle, the organization identifies its material
topics, explains why each is material, and then shows where the impacts occur. Then, it selects topic-specific
standards most significant to its own stakeholders.

Figure 13.9 Global Reporting Initiative (GRI). Every entity reporting under GRI must use three universal
standards, covering foundations, general disclosures, and the firm's management approach. Then topic-
specific standards are chosen. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
license)

Though the GRI has provided a framework, a firm's decision about what to report rests on its definition of
materiality. GRI defines materiality in the context of a sustainability report as follows: "The report should cover
Aspects that: Reflect the organization's significant economic, environmental and social impacts; or
substantively influence the assessments and decisions of stakeholders."[72] In its 2016 report, Coca-Cola listed
these areas as its primary sustainability goals:

  · Agriculture
  · Human and Workplace Rights
  · Climate Protection

71 Global Reporting Initiative (GRI). "GRI Standards." n.d. https://www.globalreporting.org/standards
72 Global Reporting Initiative (GRI). "G4 Sustainability Reporting Guidelines. Reporting Principles and Standard Disclosures. 2013.
688  Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting

  · Giving Back
  · Water Stewardship
  · Packaging and Recycling
  · Women's Economic Development[73]

Dow Chemical issues a different type of report and lists these categories:

  · Who We Are--Strategy and Profile
  · Why We Do It--Global Challenges
  · What We Do--Our Products and Solutions
  · How We Do It--Our People and Operations
  · Awards and Recognitions[74]

Sustainability reporting is not confined to manufacturing or merchandising. Service organizations report as
well. For example, Bank of America states in its 2016 sustainability report: "At Bank of America, we are guided
by a common purpose to help make financial lives better through the power of every connection. We deliver
on this through a focus on responsible growth and environmental, social and governance leadership. Through
these efforts, we are driving growth--investing in the success of our employees, helping to create jobs,
develop communities, foster economic mobility and address society's biggest challenges--while managing
risk and providing a return to our clients and our business."[75] For more information about the GRI
(https://openstax.org/l/50GRI2) can be found on the web.

   CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

   Sustainability in Mobile Telecommunications

   With more than 460,000 employees, China Mobile Limited is the largest mobile telecommunications
   company in the world. The company published their first GRI report in 2006, and, since then, the
   company has been able to review and disclose key sustainability performance indicators. Wen Xuelian,
   responsible for CSR reporting and management told GRI that sustainability reporting has helped the
   company to keep track of material sustainability issues and to improve overall performance each year.
   Xuelian notes that "at China Mobile we have built our CSR management systems by combining elements
   of the GRI framework with the operational infrastructure that we already had in place."[76]

   Another challenge, Xuelian explains, was quantifying costs and benefits of the company's sustainability
   efforts. "Over the years of reporting, we have gradually built up relevant systems and incorporated social
   and environmental impact assessments into the early stage of business development and introduced
   external assessment methods for better evaluation."[77]

   The company addressed material issues such as network connectivity, information security, using
   information to benefit society, energy conservation, GHG emissions, reduction of poverty, employee
   development and anti-corruption efforts and sustainability reporting helped them to be more

73 Coca-Cola Company. "2016 Sustainability Report: Women's Economic Empowerment." August 17, 2017. https://www.coca-
colacompany.com/stories/2016-womens-economic-empowerment
74 Dow Chemical Company. Redefining the Role of Business in Society: 2016 Sustainability Report. 2017. http://storage.dow.com.edgesuite.net/
dow.com/sustainability/highlights/Dow_2016_Sustainability_Report.pdf
75 Bank of America. "Responsible Growth." n.d. https://about.bankofamerica.com/en-us/what-guides-us/driving-responsible-growth.html

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting  689

   transparent in their operations. In the 10 years since implementation, they have reduced their electricity
   consumption per unit of business volume by 94%, built over 13,000 new energy base stations, reduced
   timber usage in packaging by over 600,000 cubic meters and introduced smart digital solutions for
   community emissions reductions.[78]

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Visit the GRI website (https://openstax.org/l/50GRI) and select one of the companies in the featured
   reports. Locate the company's sustainability report on their website and then locate their oldest
   sustainability report publication available. How has the company improved their corporate social
   responsibility performance since they implemented GRI reporting?

Sustainability Accounting Standards Board (SASB)

GRI standards were targeted at a variety of stakeholders, from the community at large to investors and
lenders. This meant that the scope of disclosure encouraged by the GRI standards was perhaps too broad for
companies that were primarily focused on reporting to investors in routine terms. Investors have their own
unique needs related to sustainability information. Their concerns are related to the price and value of the
organization, whereas other stakeholders are interested in how the company might affect them specifically.
This effect may not even be financial; it could be whether the company pollutes in its local community, or it
could be how a firm treats its workers.
For this reason, the Sustainability Accounting Standards Board (SASB) was established in 2011. SASB's mission
is to help businesses around the world identify, manage and report on the sustainability topics that matter
most to their investors. The SASB develops standards for disclosure of material sustainability information to
investors, which can meet the disclosure requirements for known trends and uncertainties in the Management
Discussion and Analysis section filed with the Securities Exchange Commission. SASB's version of materiality
differs somewhat from the GRI's version.
Whereas the GRI viewed materiality as the inclusion of information that reflects an organization's significant
economic, environmental, and social impacts or its substantial influence on the assessments and decisions of
stakeholders, SASB adopted the US Supreme Court's view that information is material if there is "a substantial
likelihood that the disclosure of the omitted fact would have been viewed by the reasonable investor as having
significantly altered the `total mix' of information made available".[79] It is up to the firms to determine

76 Xuelian, Wen. "China Mobile: Helping Build a Robust Sustainability Reporting Community in China." GRI. Nov. 7, 2017.
https://www.globalreporting.org/information/news-and-press-center/Pages/China-Mobile-Helping-build-a-robust-sustainability-reporting-
community-in-China.aspx
77 Xuelian, Wen. "China Mobile: Helping Build a Robust Sustainability Reporting Community in China." GRI. Nov. 7, 2017.
https://www.globalreporting.org/information/news-and-press-center/Pages/China-Mobile-Helping-build-a-robust-sustainability-reporting-
community-in-China.aspx
78 Xuelian, Wen. "China Mobile: Helping Build a Robust Sustainability Reporting Community in China." GRI. Nov. 7, 2017.
https://www.globalreporting.org/information/news-and-press-center/Pages/China-Mobile-Helping-build-a-robust-sustainability-reporting-
community-in-China.aspx
690  Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting

whether something is material and needs reporting, and this determination would begin with the initial
questions "Is the topic important to the total mix of information?" and "Would it be of interest to the
reasonable investor.[80]

The SASB standards, available for 79 industries across 10 sectors, help firms disclose material sustainability
factors that are likely to affect financial performance. For example, a company that has operations in a
developing nation may need to disclose its employment practices in that country to inform users of the risks to
which the company is exposed because of its operations. SASB Standards and Framework
(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/50SASBFramework) to see the current SASB conceptual framework.

Integrated Reporting

Even though companies were reporting through a range of mechanisms--sustainability reports, triple bottom
line, and CSR reports--these methods of reporting were seen as fragmented and not integrating the financial
and non-financial information into one report (Figure 13.10).[81] Also, the methods "failed to make the
connection between the organization's strategy, its financial performance and its performance on
environmental, social and governance issues."[82]

In response to these criticisms, the International Integrated Reporting Council (IIRC) was formed in 2010,
touting Integrated Reporting as a solution to the shortfalls of financial reporting. Its intent is to act as a
catalyst for behavioral change and long-term thinking,[83] bringing together financial, social, environmental
and governance information in a clear, concise, consistent and comparable format.[84]

The goals of Integrated Reporting are to:

  · improve the quality of information provided to investors and lenders
  · communicate the full range of factors that materially affect the ability of an organization to create value

      over time by using a more cohesive and efficient approach to corporate reporting which draws on
      different reporting strands.
  · enhance accountability and stewardship for the broad base of six capitals (financial, manufactured,
      intellectual, human, social and relationship, natural) and promote understanding of their
      interdependencies.
  · support integrated thinking, decision-making and actions so as to create value[85].

As outlined, the Integrated Reporting framework identifies six broad categories of capital used by
organizations which are: financial, manufactured, intellectual, human, social and relationship, and natural.

Whether information should be prepared and presented, that is, whether it is material in its inclusion is

79 TSC Indus. v. Northway, Inc. (426 U.S. 438, 449 (1976)).
80 The explanation of SASB's interpretation of "total mix" can be viewed on their website. Sustainability Accounting Standards Board (SASB).
SASB's Approach to Materiality for the Purpose of Standards Development (Staff Bulletin No. SB002-07062017). July 6, 2017. http://library.sasb.org/
wp-content/uploads/2017/01/ApproachMateriality-Staff-Bulletin-01192017.pdf?hsCtaTracking=9280788c-
d775-4b34-8bc8-5447a06a6d38%7C2e22652a-5486-4854-b68f-73fea01a2414--Ed.
81 Wendy Stubbs, Colin Higgins, and Markus Milne. "Why Do Companies Not Produce Sustainability Reports?" November 12, 2012. Business
Strategy and the Environment 22(7): 456-470.
82 Harold P. Roth. "Is Integrated Reporting in the Future?" April 22, 2014. CPA Journal 84(3): 62-67. https://insurancenewsnet.com/oarticle/Is-
Integrated-Reporting-in-the-Future-a-493109#.XC6i GGm1vpw
83 Stathis Gould. "Integrated Reporting <IR> Longs for Finance Professionals." International Federation of Accountants (IFAC). February 2, 2017.
https://www.ifac.org/global-knowledge-gateway/business-reporting/discussion/integrated-reporting-longs-finance
84 International Federation of Accountants. "A4S and GRI Announce Formation of the IIRC." August 2, 2010. https://www.ifac.org/news-
events/a4s-and-gri-announces-formation-iirc-0
85 International Integrated Reporting Council (IIRC). The International Integrated Reporting Framework. 2013. http://integratedreporting.org/
wp-content/uploads/2013/12/13-12-08-THE-INTERNATIONAL-IR-FRAMEWORK-2-1.pdf

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting  691

determined by:

  · Identifying relevant matters based on their ability to affect value creation--that is how it increases,
      decreases or transforms the capitals caused by the organization's activities. This may be value created for
      the organization itself or for stakeholders, including society itself.

  · Evaluating the importance of relevant matters in terms of their known or potential effect on value
      creation. This includes evaluating the magnitude of a occurrence's effect and its likelihood of occurrence.

  · Prioritizing those matters based on their relative importance so as to focus on the most important
      matters when determining how they should be reported.

  · Determining what information to disclose about material matters. This may require some judgment and
      discussion with stakeholders to ensure that the report meets its primary purpose.[86]

Integrated Reporting has been adopted by a number of companies throughout the world and is mandatory
for listed companies in South Africa and Brazil. So far, it has been slow to take hold in the U.S., however, a
number of companies have implemented Integrated Reporting, including Clorox, Entergy, General Electric,
Jones Lang LaSalle, PepsiCo, Prudential Financial, and Southwest Airlines.

Figure 13.10 Most Useful Non-Financial Information Sources for Investment Decisions. Although Integrated
Reporting does not have mandatory status in many countries, an Ernst & Young survey of Global Investors
found that integrated reports ranked second after annual reports in importance for decision-making.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

You can find out more information about the IR framework by visiting the Integrated Reporting
(https://openstax.org/l/50Reporting) website.

 13.4 Future Issues in Sustainability

Sustainability reporting is still relatively new and its use is not yet mandatory. But from the standpoint of
materiality, companies should disclose information if it has become important enough to influence the

86 International Integrated Reporting Council (IIRC). The International Integrated Reporting Framework. 2013. http://integratedreporting.org/
wp-content/uploads/2013/12/13-12-08-THE-INTERNATIONAL-IR-FRAMEWORK-2-1.pdf
692  Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting

decisions of users of financial information.

The focus on sustainability has led to some notable innovation. For example, Tesla Corporation has become
the United States' premier electric car manufacturer and is planning an electric semi-trailer to compete with
diesel semi-trailers. The company has also made huge strides in the development of economically viable
battery and solar technologies, and developing affordable attractive glass solar tiles that can provide all the
electricity necessary for the typical home. The Tesla Gigafactory, located in Sparks, Nevada, expects to be able
to produce more lithium ion batteries in one year than were produced in globally in 2013.

If industries reduce carbon emissions and improve social responsibility, what issues remain to guide the quest
for sustainability in the future? One possibility is the need for security against cyberattacks, which not only
harm the company's functioning but also dent consumer confidence. Another issue will be whether companies
can continue to become or remain global in their operations, as political winds shift and the potential arises
for backlash against the resulting economic changes in industrialized nations.

A third issue is the role of artificial intelligence (AI). As AI gains prominence and robots become more capable
of undertaking complex tasks, white-collar workers of the 21st century may find themselves losing jobs like
their 20th-century manufacturing counterparts did. This result will raise a number of ethical questions, such as
whether corporations have a greater responsibility to society than to shareholders, and whether the use of
robots should be taxed in order for governments to provide retraining to displaced workers and a universal
basic income[87].

AI can herald positive change as well. It is expected, for instance, that 10 million self-driving cars will be on the
road by 2020,[88] most of them electric and rechargeable using wind or solar power. In fact, you may not even
need to own a vehicle at all! Instead, you can be taken to work in a driverless car that will drop you off and
then collect other passengers.
These changes are examples of what some call the technological revolution.[89] To maintain relevance, today's
worker must learn to be multi-skilled, more innovative, and have a good analytical mind that is able to think
critically and creatively. These types of shifts can increase stress for employees and means that the business
will be subject to high degrees of scrutiny by stakeholders. As a result, stakeholders will demand that
companies be more accountable than simply providing financial reports.

   THINK IT THROUGH

   Robot Tax

   In 2017, Microsoft founder, Bill Gates called for a "robot tax" to be introduced to offset the inequality
   expected to result from automation.[90] He called for the robot tax to finance a Universal Basic Income
   (UBI). A universal basic income is the concept by which citizens would receive a regular and
   unconditional amount of money from the government that is sufficient to meet basic needs. Another
   similar concept is that of a Universal Basic Dividend (UBD) by which a portion of the initial public
   offerings (IPOs) of a company would go into a public trust that generates an income stream to pay the
   UBD.[91]

87 Catherine Clifford. "Automation Could Kill 2× More Jobs Than the Great Depression--so San Francisco Lawmaker Pushes for Bill Gates'
`Robot Tax.'" CNBC. August 24, 2017. https://www.cnbc.com/2017/08/24/san-francisco-lawmaker-pushes-forward-bill-gates-robot-tax.html
88 Business Insider Intelligence. "10 Million Self-Driving Cars Will Be on the Road by 2020." Business Insider. June 15, 2016.
http://www.businessinsider.com/report-10-million-self-driving-cars-will-be-on-the-road-by-2020-2015-5-6
89 Klaus Schwab. "Are You Ready for the Technological Revolution?" World Economic Forum. February 19, 2015. https://www.weforum.org/
agenda/2015/02/are-you-ready-for-the-technological-revolution/

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting                       693

· What are the costs to society of increased automation?
· How might a robot tax be calculated and implemented?

The discussion of the environmental and social responsibility in this chapter only touched on some of the
issues that affect our world. Sustainability reporting allows companies to not only report what they are doing
to be good global citizens, it also makes them more aware of areas in which they need to improve. Awareness
of the areas that need improvement allows companies to create a plan to continually improve their role in
society. In addition, as more and more companies assess their own social responsibility and move to improve
their sustainability, it draws attention to unreported sustainability issues as well as to companies that are not
being socially aware. Social responsibility reporting has moved us a long way from merely reporting the
financial results of businesses. It provides a foundation that links all businesses to all citizens, whether they are
shareholders or not, and it helps bind us all in a way that says we are all truly part of a single, global
environment that is determined by the actions of both businesses and citizens.

90 Yanis Varoufakis. "Robot Taxes and Universal Basic Income." Acuity. June 16, 2017. https://www.acuitymag.com/technology/robot-taxes-
and-universal-basic-income
91 Yanis Varoufakis. "Robot Taxes and Universal Basic Income." Acuity. June 16, 2017. https://www.acuitymag.com/technology/robot-taxes-
and-universal-basic-income
694  Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting

     Key Terms

Brundtland Commission Report report issued after the 1987 World Commission on Environment and
     Development that laid the groundwork for the concept of sustainable development

business sustainability actions taken to sustain the business so that it survives and thrives well into the
     future

carbon footprint measure of the amount of CO2 generated by an individual, group or organization
carbon output measure of carbon dioxide emissions into the atmosphere
climate change change in climate patterns due to the increased levels of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere

     which is attributed mainly to the usage of fossil fuels
corporate social responsibility (CSR) actions that firms take to assume responsibility for their impact on the

     environment and social well-being
environmental sustainability situation in which rates of resource use can be continued indefinitely without

     permanently depleting those resources
equity issues related to the fairness of pay and job promotions, regardless of gender, sexual orientation,

     race or religion
full-cost accounting accounting that recognizes all costs related to the provision of a product or service; this

     includes all economic, environmental and social costs
life-cycle accounting similar to full-cost accounting, this assesses all costs related to the production of a

     product from the extraction of raw materials used to the final disposal of the product at the end of its life
materiality how significant an event or issue is to warrant its inclusion or discussion
non-renewable resources resources that, once used, are depleted, and not able to be used again
P/E ratio company's stock price divided by the company's earnings per share and indicates the amount

     investors are willing to pay for one dollar of earnings
Paris Climate Agreement 2015 agreement between 196 nations to strive to limit the increase of global

     temperatures to 1.5 degrees Celsius
renewable energy energy that is not depleted once used, for example, tidal energy, wind energy or solar

     power
social contract expectation that companies will hold to an unwritten contract with society as a whole
stakeholder person or group with an interest or concern in some aspect of the organization
sustainability meeting the needs of the present generation without compromising the ability of future

     generations to meet their own needs by being aware of current economic, social, and environmental
     impacts
sustainability report report that presents the economic, environmental or social impacts that a corporation
     or organization was responsible for
sustainable development development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the
     ability of future generations to meet their own needs
triple bottom line (TBL) expansion of traditional reporting that is focused on economic performance, to
     include social and environmental performance

     Summary

13.1 Describe Sustainability and the Way It Creates Business Value
  · Users of financial reports want to know whether businesses are making appropriate decisions not only to
      increase shareholder wealth, but also to sustain the business, and the world around it, into the future.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting  695

      This management goal is called business sustainability.
  · Although the U.S. has pulled out of the Paris Climate Agreement, many companies have announced their

      own commitment to maintain the spirit of the Agreement.
  · Early ventures into sustainability practices and reporting often arose in response to negative events and

      even tragedies as communities demanded more accountability by companies that operated within those
      communities.
  · Many businesses have chosen to develop sustainable business practices because they realize doing so
      can provide positive benefits, not just to society and the environment, but also to the long-term viability of
      their own business.

13.2 Identify User Needs for Information
  · Users of sustainability reporting information are not just primary users such as shareholders and lenders
      but can also be secondary users such as employees, customers, the community, governments, and
      regulators.
  · Shareholders concern themselves with the future viability of the company and want profits to be
      sustained or increased over the long term.
  · Lenders want to know the company borrowing from them does not have any going-concern risks that
      could affect its ability to repay the loan.
  · Employees and potential employees want assurance that they will be fairly compensated, that the
      workplace is safe and the employer ethical, and that all employees have equal rights and opportunities,
      regardless of gender, race, religion, or sexual orientation.
  · Customers want to know the companies to which they give their money reflect their own values and
      beliefs.
  · Governments and regulators want to be able to see that a company is behaving responsibly.
  · Communities want to know the organization is behaving at the level of society's expectations. This
      information need reflects the existence of a social contract, the expectation that companies will hold to an
      unwritten contract with society as a whole.

13.3 Discuss Examples of Major Sustainability Initiatives
  · Materiality describes how significant an event or issue is to warrant its inclusion or discussion.
  · The not-for-profit Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) provides companies with guidance about how to report
      sustainability and identifies common themes and components for reports and in 2016 produced its first
      set of global reporting standards. According to GRI, 92% of the Global 250 produced sustainability reports
      in 2016.
  · The Sustainability Accounting Standards Board (SASB) was established in 2011 to develop standards for
      disclosure of material sustainability information to investors. SASB adopted the view of materiality taken
      by the US Supreme Court, that information is material if there is "a substantial likelihood that the
      disclosure of the omitted fact would have been viewed by the reasonable investor as having significantly
      altered the `total mix' of information made available."[92] SASB standards are available for 79 industries
      across 10 sectors.
  · The International Integrated Reporting Council (IIRC) was formed in 2010 to improve the quality of
      information provided to investors and lenders, promote a more cohesive and efficient approach to
      corporate reporting which draws on different reporting strands, enhance accountability and stewardship
      for six types of capital (financial, manufactured, intellectual, human, social and relationship, and natural),
      and support integrated thinking, decision-making and actions so as to create value.

92 Sustainability Accounting Standards Board (SASB). Hardware: Sustainability Accounting Standard. Aprril 2014. https://www.sasb.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/04/SASB_Standard_Hardware_Provisional.pdf
696                                                                               Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting

13.4 Future Issues in Sustainability
  · Innovation, security risks, and globalization mean that businesses must adapt quickly or risk becoming
      obsolete.
  · Artificial intelligence is predicted to significantly change our lives in the future. Some of those changes
      may threaten the stability of employment for white collar workers. Workers must learn to be multi-skilled,
      more innovative and possess a good analytical mind.

     Multiple Choice

1. 13.1 Which agreement did 196 nations adopt in December 2015?
    A. Oslo Accord
    B. Paris Climate Agreement
    C. Kyoto Agreement
    D. Copenhagen Accord

2. 13.1 The 2015 Paris Agreement on Climate Change aimed to limit the increase of global temperatures to
________.

    A. 0.5 °C
    B. 1.0 °C
    C. 1.5 °C
    D. 2.0 °C

3. 13.1 Good corporate citizenship ________.
    A. is expensive to implement and does not guarantee returns
    B. must have management's sincere convictions behind it in order to succeed
    C. is more relevant in countries with less regulation.
    D. makes good business sense

4. 13.1 According to the World Commission on Environment and Development, how is sustainable
development defined?

    A. It meets the needs of the future without compromising the ability of the present generations to meet
          their own needs.

    B. It applies the fairness doctrine that no generation, present or future, will be disadvantaged in their
          ability to meet their own needs.

    C. It meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their
          own needs.

    D. none of the above

5. 13.1 Sustainability reporting can incorporate which of the following?
    A. environmental reporting
    B. social reporting
    C. business viability reporting
    D. all of the above

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting                                                                            697

6. 13.1 What caused Union Carbide's deadly gas leak in Bhopal, India, which killed 3,000 and injured 42,000?

A. a combination of low staff levels, corruption, pay-offs to employees to keep quiet, and the manager
      going on vacation the day before the leak

B. diversion of funds and resources to a Northern India project that also took staff from the Bhopal plant,
      plus many safety issues, including fines imposed on community members who camped too close to the
      plant

C. employees' deciding to have lunch before dealing with the pressure buildup inside the tank and bribes
      paid to the government employees who inspected the plant

D. a combination of low staff levels, numerous safety issues, and a lack of immediate employee attention
      to the problem as pressure built up inside the tank

7. 13.1 Nestlé's reputation was damaged when the company was accused of which of the following?
    A. forcing mothers to buy baby formula within days of delivering their babies
    B. promoting inadequate nutrition in developing countries
    C. providing cheap formula to mothers in developing countries, but more expensive to mothers in
          developed countries
    D. selling poor quality bottled water to developing countries

8. 13.1 Which form of energy is renewable?
    A. solar
    B. oil
    C. coal
    D. nuclear

9. 13.1 Which of the following types of reporting does the Triple Bottom Line not incorporate?
    A. management
    B. social
    C. environmental
    D. economic

10.     13.2 Which of the following best defines stakeholders?
    A.  investors and lenders
    B.  environmental groups
    C.  anyone directly or indirectly affected by the organization
    D.  groups or individuals financially impacted by the organization

11.     13.2 Which of the following statements is most often the case?
    A.  Socially responsible businesses tend to post higher profits than those not focused on social
        responsibility.
    B.  Companies that are not socially responsible will have better profits, but have a moral obligation to
        society.
    C.  Socially responsible investing gives poorer returns than non-socially responsible investing.
    D.  Investors are more short termed focus and so socially responsible investing should not be a factor in
        their investment portfolio.
698                                                                              Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting

12.     13.3 Which standards are considered universal under the GRI?
    A.  economic, environmental, social
    B.  foundation, general disclosures, management approach
    C.  foundation, economic, general disclosures
    D.  management approach, economic, social

13.     13.3 The SASB view on materiality has been adapted from which of the following?
    A.  the U.S. Executive branch
    B.  the GRI definition
    C.  a determination by U.S. Congress
    D.  the U.S. Supreme Court

14.     13.3 The fundamental tenets of SASB's Approach are considered ________.
    A.  evidence-based, industry-specific, and market-informed
    B.  industry-specific, interest-based, and value creating
    C.  consensus-based, industry-specific, and actionable
    D.  interest-based, value creating, and market-informed

15.     13.3 How many broad categories of capital are identified by the Integrated Reporting Framework?
    A.  2
    B.  4
    C.  6
    D.  8

     Questions

1. 13.1 What is sustainability and how might corporations incorporate sustainability practices into their
business?
2. 13.1 What is the value of triple bottom line reporting to users? What is the cost to the company to
provide this extra information?
3. 13.1 What type of information do you think an oil company should include in their sustainability report?
What about a car manufacturer? A large retailer?
4. 13.2 Identify four different stakeholders in need of sustainability information and show how their actions
might affect a business.
5. 13.2 How might a business interact with each of the four different stakeholders you identified in the
previous exercise?
6. 13.2 Contrast the investment risk potentials of an electric vehicle manufacturer whose shares have a PE
ratio of 10:1 and a coal company whose stock has a PE ratio of 2.5 to 1.
7. 13.2 There are currently no formal mandatory environmental accounting standards firms must adhere
to. Given the lack of regulation, should accountants even bother with preparing sustainability reports? Why or
why not?
8. 13.3 Explain the role and purpose of the Global Reporting Initiative
9. 13.3 Explain the role and purpose of the Sustainability Accounting Standards Board.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting                                           699

10. 13.3 Explain the role and purpose of the Integrated Reporting Framework.

     Thought Provokers

TP1. 13.2 Obtain the 2016/2017 sustainability report for Ford Motor Company. Prepare a report that
addresses the following issues:

    A. How do the vision and mission statement on the company's website relate to its definition of
          sustainability, if at all?

    B. Who are Ford's stakeholders? Do you think that the company has addressed the information needs of
          each stakeholder group?

    C. What type of governance processes are in place to ensure that the Board of Directors' values are
          aligned with sustainability?

    D. How does Ford tie sustainability to its risk-management system? What potential risks does Ford face
          that could harm the company, the environment, or the community?
700                                                                               Chapter 13 Sustainability Reporting

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Appendix A  701

 A Financial Statement Analysis

Financial Statement Analysis

Financial statement analysis reviews financial information found on financial statements to make informed
decisions about the business. The income statement, statement of retained earnings, balance sheet, and
statement of cash flows, among other financial information, can be analyzed. The information obtained from
this analysis can benefit decision-making for internal and external stakeholders and can give a company
valuable information on overall performance and specific areas for improvement. The analysis can help them
with budgeting, deciding where to cut costs, how to increase revenues, and future capital investments
opportunities.

When considering the outcomes from analysis, it is important for a company to understand that data
produced needs to be compared to others within industry and close competitors. The company should also
consider their past experience and how it corresponds to current and future performance expectations. Three
common analysis tools are used for decision-making; horizontal analysis, vertical analysis, and financial ratios.

For our discussion of financial statement analysis, we will use Banyan Goods. Banyan Goods is a
merchandising company that sells a variety of products. Figure A.1 shows the comparative income statements
and balance sheets for the past two years.

Figure A.1 Comparative Income Statements and Balance Sheets.

Keep in mind that the comparative income statements and balance sheets for Banyan Goods are simplified for
our calculations and do not fully represent all the accounts a company could maintain. Let's begin our analysis
discussion by looking at horizontal analysis.
702                                                                                             Appendix A

Horizontal Analysis

Horizontal analysis (also known as trend analysis) looks at trends over time on various financial statement line
items. A company will look at one period (usually a year) and compare it to another period. For example, a
company may compare sales from their current year to sales from the prior year. The trending of items on
these financial statements can give a company valuable information on overall performance and specific areas
for improvement. It is most valuable to do horizontal analysis for information over multiple periods to see how
change is occurring for each line item. If multiple periods are not used, it can be difficult to identify a trend.
The year being used for comparison purposes is called the base year (usually the prior period). The year of
comparison for horizontal analysis is analyzed for dollar and percent changes against the base year.

The dollar change is found by taking the dollar amount in the base year and subtracting that from the year of
analysis.

Using Banyan Goods as our example, if Banyan wanted to compare net sales in the current year (year of
analysis) of $120,000 to the prior year (base year) of $100,000, the dollar change would be as follows:

     Dollar change = $120,000 - $1000,000 = $20,000                                                      (A1)

The percentage change is found by taking the dollar change, dividing by the base year amount, and then
multiplying by 100.

Let's compute the percentage change for Banyan Goods' net sales.

     Percentage change =  $20,000                                                  × 100 = 20%           (A2)

                           $100,000

This means Banyan Goods saw an increase of $20,000 in net sales in the current year as compared to the prior
year, which was a 20% increase. The same dollar change and percentage change calculations would be used
for the income statement line items as well as the balance sheet line items. Figure A.2 shows the complete
horizontal analysis of the income statement and balance sheet for Banyan Goods.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Appendix A  703

Figure A.2 Income Statements and Horizontal Analysis.

Depending on their expectations, Banyan Goods could make decisions to alter operations to produce expected
outcomes. For example, Banyan saw a 50% accounts receivable increase from the prior year to the current
year. If they were only expecting a 20% increase, they may need to explore this line item further to determine
what caused this difference and how to correct it going forward. It could possibly be that they are extending
credit more readily than anticipated or not collecting as rapidly on outstanding accounts receivable. The
company will need to further examine this difference before deciding on a course of action. Another method
of analysis Banyan might consider before making a decision is vertical analysis.

Vertical Analysis

Vertical analysis shows a comparison of a line item within a statement to another line item within that same
statement. For example, a company may compare cash to total assets in the current year. This allows a
company to see what percentage of cash (the comparison line item) makes up total assets (the other line item)
during the period. This is different from horizontal analysis, which compares across years. Vertical analysis
compares line items within a statement in the current year. This can help a business to know how much of one
item is contributing to overall operations. For example, a company may want to know how much inventory
contributes to total assets. They can then use this information to make business decisions such as preparing
the budget, cutting costs, increasing revenues, or capital investments.

The company will need to determine which line item they are comparing all items to within that statement and
then calculate the percentage makeup. These percentages are considered common-size because they make
businesses within industry comparable by taking out fluctuations for size. It is typical for an income statement
to use net sales (or sales) as the comparison line item. This means net sales will be set at 100% and all other
704                                                                                             Appendix A

line items within the income statement will represent a percentage of net sales.

On the balance sheet, a company will typically look at two areas: (1) total assets, and (2) total liabilities and
stockholders' equity. Total assets will be set at 100% and all assets will represent a percentage of total assets.
Total liabilities and stockholders' equity will also be set at 100% and all line items within liabilities and equity
will be represented as a percentage of total liabilities and stockholders' equity. The line item set at 100% is
considered the base amount and the comparison line item is considered the comparison amount. The formula
to determine the common-size percentage is:

For example, if Banyan Goods set total assets as the base amount and wanted to see what percentage of total
assets were made up of cash in the current year, the following calculation would occur.

     Common-size percentage = $110,000                                             × 100 = 44%  (A3)

                                $250,000

Cash in the current year is $110,000 and total assets equal $250,000, giving a common-size percentage of 44%.
If the company had an expected cash balance of 40% of total assets, they would be exceeding expectations.
This may not be enough of a difference to make a change, but if they notice this deviates from industry
standards, they may need to make adjustments, such as reducing the amount of cash on hand to reinvest in
the business. Figure A.3 shows the common-size calculations on the comparative income statements and
comparative balance sheets for Banyan Goods.

Figure A.3 Income Statements and Vertical Analysis.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Appendix A                                                                        705

Even though vertical analysis is a statement comparison within the same year, Banyan can use information
from the prior year's vertical analysis to make sure the business is operating as expected. For example,
unearned revenues increased from the prior year to the current year and made up a larger portion of total
liabilities and stockholders' equity. This could be due to many factors, and Banyan Goods will need to examine
this further to see why this change has occurred. Let's turn to financial statement analysis using financial
ratios.

Overview of Financial Ratios

Financial ratios help both internal and external users of information make informed decisions about a
company. A stakeholder could be looking to invest, become a supplier, make a loan, or alter internal
operations, among other things, based in part on the outcomes of ratio analysis. The information resulting
from ratio analysis can be used to examine trends in performance, establish benchmarks for success, set
budget expectations, and compare industry competitors. There are four main categories of ratios: liquidity,
solvency, efficiency, and profitability. Note that while there are more ideal outcomes for some ratios, the
industry in which the business operates can change the influence each of these outcomes has over
stakeholder decisions. (You will learn more about ratios, industry standards, and ratio interpretation in
advanced accounting courses.)

Liquidity Ratios

Liquidity ratios show the ability of the company to pay short-term obligations if they came due immediately
with assets that can be quickly converted to cash. This is done by comparing current assets to current
liabilities. Lenders, for example, may consider the outcomes of liquidity ratios when deciding whether to
extend a loan to a company. A company would like to be liquid enough to manage any currently due
obligations but not too liquid where they may not be effectively investing in growth opportunities. Three
common liquidity measurements are working capital, current ratio, and quick ratio.

Working Capital

Working capital measures the financial health of an organization in the short-term by finding the difference
between current assets and current liabilities. A company will need enough current assets to cover current
liabilities; otherwise, they may not be able to continue operations in the future. Before a lender extends credit,
they will review the working capital of the company to see if the company can meet their obligations. A larger
difference signals that a company can cover their short-term debts and a lender may be more willing to extend
the loan. On the other hand, too large of a difference may indicate that the company may not be correctly
using their assets to grow the business. The formula for working capital is:

Using Banyan Goods, working capital is computed as follows for the current year:

            Working capital = $200,000 - $100,000 = $100,000                      (A4)

In this case, current assets were $200,000, and current liabilities were $100,000. Current assets were far greater
than current liabilities for Banyan Goods and they would easily be able to cover short-term debt.

The dollar value of the difference for working capital is limited given company size and scope. It is most useful
to convert this information to a ratio to determine the company's current financial health. This ratio is the
current ratio.
706                                                                                                Appendix A

Current Ratio

Working capital expressed as a ratio is the current ratio. The current ratio considers the amount of current
assets available to cover current liabilities. The higher the current ratio, the more likely the company can cover
its short-term debt. The formula for current ratio is:

The current ratio in the current year for Banyan Goods is:

                 Current ratio = $200,000                                          = 2 or 2:1      (A5)

                                   $100,000

A 2:1 ratio means the company has twice as many current assets as current liabilities; typically, this would be
plenty to cover obligations. This may be an acceptable ratio for Banyan Goods, but if it is too high, they may
want to consider using those assets in a different way to grow the company.

Quick Ratio

The quick ratio, also known as the acid-test ratio, is similar to the current ratio except current assets are more
narrowly defined as the most liquid assets, which exclude inventory and prepaid expenses. The conversion of
inventory and prepaid expenses to cash can sometimes take more time than the liquidation of other current
assets. A company will want to know what they have on hand and can use quickly if an immediate obligation is
due. The formula for the quick ratio is:

The quick ratio for Banyan Goods in the current year is:

                 Quick ratio = $110,000 + $20,000 + $30,000                        = 1.6 or 1.6:1  (A6)

                                 $100,000

A 1.6:1 ratio means the company has enough quick assets to cover current liabilities.

Another category of financial measurement uses solvency ratios.

Solvency Ratios

Solvency implies that a company can meet its long-term obligations and will likely stay in business in the
future. To stay in business the company must generate more revenue than debt in the long-term. Meeting
long-term obligations includes the ability to pay any interest incurred on long-term debt. Two main solvency
ratios are the debt-to-equity ratio and the times interest earned ratio.

Debt to Equity Ratio

The debt-to-equity ratio shows the relationship between debt and equity as it relates to business financing. A
company can take out loans, issue stock, and retain earnings to be used in future periods to keep operations
running. It is less risky and less costly to use equity sources for financing as compared to debt resources. This
is mainly due to interest expense repayment that a loan carries as opposed to equity, which does not have this
requirement. Therefore, a company wants to know how much debt and equity contribute to its financing.
Ideally, a company would prefer more equity than debt financing. The formula for the debt to equity ratio is:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Appendix A                                                                                              707

The information needed to compute the debt-to-equity ratio for Banyan Goods in the current year can be
found on the balance sheet.

                   Debt-to-equity ratio = $150,000     = 1.5 or 1.5:1                                   (A7)

                                            $100,000

This means that for every $1 of equity contributed toward financing, $1.50 is contributed from lenders. This
would be a concern for Banyan Goods. This could be a red flag for potential investors that the company could
be trending toward insolvency. Banyan Goods might want to get the ratio below 1:1 to improve their long-
term business viability.

Times Interest Earned Ratio

Time interest earned measures the company's ability to pay interest expense on long-term debt incurred. This
ability to pay is determined by the available earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) are deducted. These
earnings are considered the operating income. Lenders will pay attention to this ratio before extending credit.
The more times over a company can cover interest, the more likely a lender will extend long-term credit. The
formula for times interest earned is:

The information needed to compute times interest earned for Banyan Goods in the current year can be found
on the income statement.

                   Times interest earned =  $43,000    = 21.5 times                                     (A8)

                                             $2,000

The $43,000 is the operating income, representing earnings before interest and taxes. The 21.5 times outcome
suggests that Banyan Goods can easily repay interest on an outstanding loan and creditors would have little
risk that Banyan Goods would be unable to pay.

Another category of financial measurement uses efficiency ratios.

Efficiency Ratios

Efficiency shows how well a company uses and manages their assets. Areas of importance with efficiency are
management of sales, accounts receivable, and inventory. A company that is efficient typically will be able to
generate revenues quickly using the assets it acquires. Let's examine four efficiency ratios: accounts receivable
turnover, total asset turnover, inventory turnover, and days' sales in inventory.

Accounts Receivable Turnover

Accounts receivable turnover measures how many times in a period (usually a year) a company will collect
cash from accounts receivable. A higher number of times could mean cash is collected more quickly and that
credit customers are of high quality. A higher number is usually preferable because the cash collected can be
reinvested in the business at a quicker rate. A lower number of times could mean cash is collected slowly on
these accounts and customers may not be properly qualified to accept the debt. The formula for accounts
receivable turnover is:
708                                                                               Appendix A

Many companies do not split credit and cash sales, in which case net sales would be used to compute accounts
receivable turnover. Average accounts receivable is found by dividing the sum of beginning and ending
accounts receivable balances found on the balance sheet. The beginning accounts receivable balance in the
current year is taken from the ending accounts receivable balance in the prior year.

When computing the accounts receivable turnover for Banyan Goods, let's assume net credit sales make up
$100,000 of the $120,000 of the net sales found on the income statement in the current year.

                             Average accounts receivable = $20,000 + $30,000 = $25,000 (A9)
                                                                                 2

                            Accounts receivable turnover = $100,000 $25,000 = 4 times

An accounts receivable turnover of four times per year may be low for Banyan Goods. Given this outcome,
they may want to consider stricter credit lending practices to make sure credit customers are of a higher
quality. They may also need to be more aggressive with collecting any outstanding accounts.

Total Asset Turnover

Total asset turnover measures the ability of a company to use their assets to generate revenues. A company
would like to use as few assets as possible to generate the most net sales. Therefore, a higher total asset
turnover means the company is using their assets very efficiently to produce net sales. The formula for total
asset turnover is:

Average total assets are found by dividing the sum of beginning and ending total assets balances found on the
balance sheet. The beginning total assets balance in the current year is taken from the ending total assets
balance in the prior year.

Banyan Goods' total asset turnover is:

      Average total assets = $200,000 + $250,000 = $225,000                       (A10)
                                                 2

     Total assets turnover = $120,000 $225,000 = 0.53 times (rounded)

The outcome of 0.53 means that for every $1 of assets, $0.53 of net sales are generated. Over time, Banyan
Goods would like to see this turnover ratio increase.

Inventory Turnover

Inventory turnover measures how many times during the year a company has sold and replaced inventory.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Appendix A                                                                                                   709

This can tell a company how well inventory is managed. A higher ratio is preferable; however, an extremely
high turnover may mean that the company does not have enough inventory available to meet demand. A low
turnover may mean the company has too much supply of inventory on hand. The formula for inventory
turnover is:

Cost of goods sold for the current year is found on the income statement. Average inventory is found by
dividing the sum of beginning and ending inventory balances found on the balance sheet. The beginning
inventory balance in the current year is taken from the ending inventory balance in the prior year.

Banyan Goods' inventory turnover is:

                      Average inventory = $35,000 + $40,000 = $37,500                                    (A11)
                                                              2

                      Inventory turnover = $60,000 $37,500 = 1.6 times

1.6 times is a very low turnover rate for Banyan Goods. This may mean the company is maintaining too high an
inventory supply to meet a low demand from customers. They may want to decrease their on-hand inventory
to free up more liquid assets to use in other ways.

Days' Sales in Inventory

Days' sales in inventory expresses the number of days it takes a company to turn inventory into sales. This
assumes that no new purchase of inventory occurred within that time period. The fewer the number of days,
the more quickly the company can sell its inventory. The higher the number of days, the longer it takes to sell
its inventory. The formula for days' sales in inventory is:

Banyan Goods' days' sales in inventory is:

            Days' sales in inventory =      $40,000   × 365 = 243 days (rounded)                         (A12)

                                            $60,000

243 days is a long time to sell inventory. While industry dictates what is an acceptable number of days to sell
inventory, 243 days is unsustainable long-term. Banyan Goods will need to better manage their inventory and
sales strategies to move inventory more quickly.

The last category of financial measurement examines profitability ratios.

Profitability Ratios

Profitability considers how well a company produces returns given their operational performance. The
company needs to leverage its operations to increase profit. To assist with profit goal attainment, company
revenues need to outweigh expenses. Let's consider three profitability measurements and ratios: profit
margin, return on total assets, and return on equity.
710                                                                               Appendix A

Profit Margin

Profit margin represents how much of sales revenue has translated into income. This ratio shows how much of
each $1 of sales is returned as profit. The larger the ratio figure (the closer it gets to 1), the more of each sales
dollar is returned as profit. The portion of the sales dollar not returned as profit goes toward expenses. The
formula for profit margin is:

For Banyan Goods, the profit margin in the current year is:

     Profit ma gin =  $35,000     = 0.29 (rounded) or 29%                                                     (A13)

                       $120,000

This means that for every dollar of sales, $0.29 returns as profit. If Banyan Goods thinks this is too low, the
company would try and find ways to reduce expenses and increase sales.

Return on Total Assets

The return on total assets measures the company's ability to use its assets successfully to generate a profit.
The higher the return (ratio outcome), the more profit is created from asset use. Average total assets are
found by dividing the sum of beginning and ending total assets balances found on the balance sheet. The
beginning total assets balance in the current year is taken from the ending total assets balance in the prior
year. The formula for return on total assets is:

For Banyan Goods, the return on total assets for the current year is:

      Average total assets = $200,000 + $250,000 = $225,000                                                   (A14)
                                                  2

     Return on total assets = $35,000 $225,000 = 0.16 (rounded) or 16%

The higher the figure, the better the company is using its assets to create a profit. Industry standards can
dictate what is an acceptable return.

Return on Equity

Return on equity measures the company's ability to use its invested capital to generate income. The invested
capital comes from stockholders investments in the company's stock and its retained earnings and is
leveraged to create profit. The higher the return, the better the company is doing at using its investments to
yield a profit. The formula for return on equity is:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Appendix A                                                                                                     711

Average stockholders' equity is found by dividing the sum of beginning and ending stockholders' equity
balances found on the balance sheet. The beginning stockholders' equity balance in the current year is taken
from the ending stockholders' equity balance in the prior year. Keep in mind that the net income is calculated
after preferred dividends have been paid.

For Banyan Goods, we will use the net income figure and assume no preferred dividends have been paid. The
return on equity for the current year is:

            Average stockholder equity = $90,000 + $100,000 = $95,000                (A15)
                                                               2

                         Return on equity = $35,000 $95,000 = 0.37 (rounded) or 37%

The higher the figure, the better the company is using its investments to create a profit. Industry standards
can dictate what is an acceptable return.

Advantages and Disadvantages of Financial Statement Analysis

There are several advantages and disadvantages to financial statement analysis. Financial statement analysis
can show trends over time, which can be helpful in making future business decisions. Converting information
to percentages or ratios eliminates some of the disparity between competitor sizes and operating abilities,
making it easier for stakeholders to make informed decisions. It can assist with understanding the makeup of
current operations within the business, and which shifts need to occur internally to increase productivity.

A stakeholder needs to keep in mind that past performance does not always dictate future performance.
Attention must be given to possible economic influences that could skew the numbers being analyzed, such as
inflation or a recession. Additionally, the way a company reports information within accounts may change over
time. For example, where and when certain transactions are recorded may shift, which may not be readily
evident in the financial statements.

A company that wants to budget properly, control costs, increase revenues, and make long-term expenditure
decisions may want to use financial statement analysis to guide future operations. As long as the company
understands the limitations of the information provided, financial statement analysis is a good tool to predict
growth and company financial strength.
712                                                                               Appendix A

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Appendix B                             713

 B Time Value of Money

Present Value of $1 Table

Figure B.1 Present Value of $1 Table.
714                                                                               Appendix B

Present Value of an Ordinary Annuity Table

Figure B.2 Present Value of an Ordinary Annuity Table.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Appendix B                            715

Future Value of $1 Table

Figure B.3 Future Value of $1 Table.
716                                                                               Appendix B

Future Value of an Ordinary Annuity Table

Figure B.4 Future Value of an Ordinary Annuity Table.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Appendix C  717

 C Suggested Resources

The resources listed provide further information on several topics: financial statements from real-world
companies, accounting software and tools, personal finance, accounting organizations, and exams and
professional certifications for accountants.

Sample Financial Statements

The following income statements and balance sheets show the finances of companies representing the
manufacturing, retail, and service industries.
Manufacturing Company: General Motors

  · Income statement: https://www.nasdaq.com/symbol/gm/financials?query=income-statement
  · Balance sheet: https://www.nasdaq.com/symbol/gm/financials?query=balance-sheet
Retail Company: Costco Wholesale
  · Income statement: https://www.nasdaq.com/symbol/cost/financials
  · Balance sheet: https://www.nasdaq.com/symbol/cost/financials?query=balance-sheet
Service Company: Prudential
  · Income statement https://www.marketwatch.com/investing/stock/pru/financials
  · Balance sheet: https://www.marketwatch.com/investing/stock/pru/financials/balance-sheet

Accounting Software and Tools

The resources listed offer a variety of tutorials, training videos, and practice activities using software and tools
common in accounting.
QuickBooks

  · QuickBooks tutorials: https://quickbooks.intuit.com/tutorials/
Peachtree/Sage 50

  · Peachtree 2011 guide: https://www.perdisco.com/peachtreeLearning/quickReferenceGuide/2011.aspx
  · Sage 50 training course with videos: https://www.freebookkeepingaccounting.com/single-post/

      Sage-50-Accounts-Training-Course-Part-1
Microsoft Excel

  · Excel tutorials, video guides, trainings, and worksheets: https://chandoo.org/wp/welcome/
  · YouTube channel with accounting-specific video tutorials: https://www.youtube.com/user/ExcelIsFun
Financial Calculators
  · HP10B setup video guide: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lmMdRfKre44
  · HP10BII video introduction and examples: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fTqkkeG1xlw
  · HP10B and HP12C time value of money calculations video guides: https://www.youtube.com/user/

      mssuprof/videos

Personal Finance

These resources can assist you with personal financial planning.
718                                                                               Appendix C

Earnings

  · Current starting salaries for recent college graduates for various majors and degrees:
      https://careers.kennesaw.edu/employers/docs/2018-nace-salary-survey-winter.pdf

  · Accounting-specific salaries and positions: https://www.roberthalf.com/blog/salaries-and-skills/the-rise-
      of-the-accountant-salary-and-10-top-accounting-jobs

Take-Home Pay

  · Salary calculator that determines your net pay--the amount you'll take home in your paycheck that you
      need to plan your budget around. In addition to calculating state and federal taxes, this resource allows
      you to input other withholdings such as health insurance or 401K contributions:
      https://www.paycheckcity.com/

Saving and Retirement Planning

Determining how much your savings will grow and how much you will have in retirement are very important
components of personal financial planning. These links will help you better plan for those aspects of saving.

  · This basic savings growth calculator includes graphs that provide helpful visuals of the impact of
      changing any assumptions such as the timing or amount of contributions or the interest rate earned:
      https://smartasset.com/investing/investment-calculator

  · To estimate retirement savings growth, use this calculator that allows you to see the impact of saving now
      (enter your current age) versus saving later (enter a future age): https://www.daveramsey.com/
      smartvestor/investment-calculator

  · This calculator lets you more accurately plan how your retirement savings will grow by allowing you to
      input any matching amounts contributed by employers: https://nb.fidelity.com/public/nb/401k/tools/
      calculators/contributioncalculator

Budgeting

  · A well-planned budget is the cornerstone of personal financial planning. Using the salary, pay and savings
      numbers obtained from the resources above, this calculator will help you create a detailed financial
      budget: https://www.clearpoint.org/tools/budget-calculator/

Debt Reduction

  · Whether it is student loans, credit cards, car loans or any other kind of debt, it is always beneficial to
      understand the impact of differing payments on paying off debt. This resource will help you see the
      impact of changing the amount paid on the payoff timing and interest paid on the debt:
      https://www.money-zine.com/calculators/loan-calculators/debt-reduction-calculator/

Accounting-Related Organizations

A number of organizations are dedicated to regulating and supporting the variety of work undertaken in the
discipline of accounting.

  · Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB): https://www.gasb.org
  · Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB): https://www.fasb.org
  · U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC): https://www.sec.gov
  · Association of Chartered Certified Accountants (ACCA): https://www.accaglobal.com
  · Institute of Management Accountants (IMA): https://www.imanet.org

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Appendix C                                                                                            719

Accounting Exams and Certificates

These sites provide information on exams and professional certifications.
Certified Public Accountant (CPA)

  · American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA): https://www.aicpa.org/content/aicpa/
  · National Association of State Boards of Accountancy (NASBA): https://nasba.org/
  · This Way to the CPA: https://thiswaytocpa.com/
Certified Management Accountant (CMA)
  · Institute of Management Accountants (IMA): https://www.imanet.org/cma-certification?ssopc=1
Certified Internal Auditor (CIA)
  · Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA)-Global: https://global.theiia.org/Pages/globaliiaHome.aspx
  · Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA)-North America: https://na.theiia.org/Pages/IIAHome.aspx
Certified Fraud Examiner (CFE)
  · Association of Certified Fraud Examiners (ACFE): http://www.acfe.com/default.aspx
Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA)
  · CFA Institute: https://www.cfainstitute.org/Pages/index.aspx
Certified Financial Planner (CFP)
  · Certified Financial Planners (CFP) Board: https://www.cfp.net/home
720                                                                               Appendix C

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Answer Key          721

Answer Key

Chapter 1

Multiple    Choice

1. D
3. A
5. A
7. A
9. C
11. A
13. C
15. C
17. C
19. B
21. D
23. D
25. D
27. C

Questions

1. Answers will vary but should include that cost analysis, branding, pricing, and competition all fall under
positioning, and this information comes from the managerial accounting staff. It is used to plan for future
processes.
3. Answers will vary but should include the following: Managers must determine what modifications and
changes need to be made to operations to get back on track to meet the stated goals and objectives.
Managers need to decide if stated goals and objectives should continue to be pursued as they are, or if they
should be modified or completely scrapped. Examples may include revising inventory controls to include
antitheft tags that trigger an alarm when inventory is moved from an approved location in order to reduce
inventory losses; installing more cameras in more strategic locations to further reduce theft from shoplifting;
revising the financial metrics such as ratios or other performance measurements to provide more meaningful
and timely insight to help determine how to get back on track; investigating why market share has not
changed as expected by talking to the sales force and analyzing market data; evaluating same-store sales to
understand how to expand sales in accordance with goals and objectives; and investigating why a production
process has experienced a bottleneck and how to relieve the pressure in that specific area, such as making
sure appropriate raw materials are available in a timely manner to avoid machine shutdowns waiting on
materials to arrive.
5. Reports generated from financial accounting are a compilation of a company's various transactions and
contain aggregated information for the entire company in the form of financial statements. For publicly traded
companies, these reports follow the rules set forth by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB). In
addition, the financial statements are verified by external auditors. Reports generated by managerial
accounting are varied in nature because they are driven by the questions that need to be addressed by
management. Different companies and different questions require different reports. Managerial accounting
reports are therefore on a more detailed level, such as on a product or division level. There are no specific
rules guiding the creation of these reports, and they are usually unaudited.
7. The primary users of information gathered by managerial accountants are internal users, including
management, employees, and officers.
9. Six qualities a managerial accountant should exhibit are commercial awareness, collaboration, effective
communication, strong technology skills, analytical skills, and ethics.
11. The chain of command for someone being hired into an organization as a staff managerial accounting is:
Management accounting supervisor  Controller  CFO  CEO  Board of Directors
13. Specialization areas for management accountants includes budget analyst, financial analyst, accounting
manager, controller, chief financial officer.
15. Professional business organizations that have a code of ethics include the American Institute of Public
Accountants, the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners, the Financial Executives Institute, the American
Marketing Association, and National Society of Professional Engineers.
17. Several accounting scandals involving publicly traded companies (Enron, WorldCom, and Arthur Andersen)
led to the act. It was aimed particularly at public accounting organizations that performed audits of publicly
traded corporations.
722                                                                               Answer Key

Chapter 2

Multiple  Choice

1. C
3. A
5. A
7. D
9. D
11. B
13. D
15. D
17. C

Questions

1. Answers will vary but should include merchandising, service, and manufacturing businesses.
3. Answers will vary but should include a discussion of operating costs such as salaries and wages, advertising,
rent, and office expenses.
5. Answers will vary but must include direct materials, direct labor, and manufacturing overhead.
7. Answers will vary but should include that fixed costs remain fixed in total across the relevant range,
bounded by a minimum and maximum activity level.
9. Answers will vary but should include that prime costs are the direct material and direct labor costs, and
conversion costs are direct labor and general factory overhead combined.
11. Answers will vary.

Chapter 3

Multiple  Choice

1. A
3. C
5. B
7. C
9. D
11. B
13. C
15. C
17. C
19. D
21. C
23. D

Questions

1. Answers will vary. Responses should include that per-unit contribution margin is the amount by which a
product's selling price exceeds it total variable cost per unit.
3. Answers will vary. Responses should include that contribution income statements express total contribution
margin for a given level of activity and can be useful in making decisions about product pricing and optimal
levels of activity.
5. Answers will vary. Responses should include the fact that the contribution margin ratio represents the
percentage of every sales dollar available to cover fixed expenses. Businesses can use this ratio when
projecting profit at various levels of sales revenue.
7. Answers will vary. Responses should include a description of how the CVP analysis information can be
brought into a projected income statement that takes into account additional revenues and expenses of the
business to create a "big picture" of what happens as a result of a change in cost, volume, and profit
9. Answers will vary. Responses should include the definition of sales mix as the relative proportions in which a
company's products are sold as well as a description of how products within the sales mix have unique sales
prices, variable costs, and contribution margins.
11. Answers will vary. Responses should include an explanation of how margin of safety allows the business to
operate at a level where the risk of falling to or below the break-even point is low. There should also be some
mention of the usefulness of the margin safety as an "alarm" for companies, such that when sales fall to the
margin of safety level, action may be warranted.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Answer Key                                           723

Chapter 4

Multiple    Choice

1. B
3. B
5. C
7. A
9. A
11. D
13. A
15. C
17. D

Questions

1. The company should use process costing. Since there are many similar items, process costing is a better fit
than job order costing.
3. The conversion cost is $72,000: the sum of direct labor, factory depreciation expense, and utility expense.
5. The expense recognition principle requires that expenses follow the revenue. Product costs are assigned to
the product because they are associated with the revenue from the sale of the product. The cost is transferred
from inventory to cost of goods sold when the item is sold. This matches the revenue from the sale with the
cost of the item being sold. Period costs are expensed when incurred because they are not related to a specific
product but are instead related to the time period in which revenue is earned.
7. B, D, C, A.
9. Management uses the activity considered to be the cost driver and multiplies that rate by the activity for
each specific job. The result is the amount of overhead applied to that specific job.
11. Expenses normally have a debit balance, and the manufacturing overhead account is debited when
expenses are incurred to recognize the incurrence. When the expenses are allocated to the asset, the work in
process inventory, the expense account manufacturing overhead is credited. This is in accordance with the
expense recognition principle. The timing of the expense follows the revenue, and when the costs are
allocated to inventory, they become a part of the product's cost and are recognized when the asset is sold.
13. direct materials

Chapter 5

Multiple    Choice

1. C
3. A
5. D
7. A
9. C
11. B
13. C
15. C
17. C
19. C

Questions

1.

Answers will vary but should include the following:
724                                                                                                    Answer Key

                          Area                    Process                                   Job Order
Types of jobs                   Identical                                         Custom order
Quantity within each job        Large volume                                      Small volume
Cost accumulation               In each department                                In each job

3. The weighted-average method assigns the beginning inventory and the costs added during the period. The
weighted-average method does not differentiate between the beginning inventory and the units started in
production. This is different from the FIFO method that accounts for the beginning inventory differently and
separately from current period costs.
5. Prime costs and conversion costs both include labor. Prime costs are the direct costs, other than equipment,
used in manufacturing and therefore are direct material and direct labor. Conversion costs are the costs
involved in converting the direct material into the product and therefore are direct labor and manufacturing
overhead.
7. Job order costing and process costing are the accounting systems used to record the costs expended to
produce a product. Conversion costs are the direct labor and manufacturing overhead involved in the
production process and exist regardless of the accounting system used.
9. While conversion typically occurs evenly throughout the process, materials are not typically added evenly, so
the ending work in process can be different. For example, when materials are added at the beginning of the
process, materials can be 100% complete and conversion can be 50% complete. Different completion
percentages result in different equivalent units.
11. Step 1: Determine the units to which costs are assigned. Step 2: Compute the equivalent units of
production. Step 3: Determine the cost per equivalent unit. Step 4: Allocate the costs to the units transferred
out and the units partially completed.
13. The costs transferred in are treated in the same way as direct material that is added to production at the
beginning of the process.
15. A. iv; B. ii; C. vi; D. vii; E. iii; F. v; G. i; H. viii.
17. Prior to the new year, a company computes the estimates of the annual overhead per department divided
by the estimated driver for that department. A driver is the measure that increases the cost of overhead and is
commonly direct labor hours, direct labor cost, or machine hours. The result is the predetermined overhead
rate. Costs are accumulated in an account called manufacturing overhead. At the end of each period, the
overhead is removed from the overhead account and applied to the department.

Chapter 6

Multiple  Choice

1. B
3. B
5. C
7. A
9. C
11. B
13. B
15. C
17. A
19. C

Questions

1. The predetermined overhead rate is the amount of manufacturing overhead that is estimated to be applied
to each product or department depending on the cost system used (job order costing or process costing). It
typically is estimated at the beginning of each period by dividing the estimated manufacturing overhead by an
activity base. While it is most commonly a year, the period can be a year, quarter, or month as determined by
management. In traditional allocation systems, that base is typically direct labor hours, direct labor dollars, or
machine hours. In activity-based costing systems, the activity base is one or more cost drivers.
3. Non-value-added costs can often be eliminated since they are rarely essential, and identifying them helps
managers reduce their costs.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Answer Key          725

5. Answers may vary but should be similar to the following: A. number of orders; B. number of customers; C.
number of meals; D. number of material requisitions received.
7. Activity-based costing has multiple cost drivers and focuses on the overhead-related activities performed
during manufacturing. Traditional allocation has a single unit-level base for allocating overhead and focuses
on the units of production.
9. Estimated overhead costs are first allocated to activity cost pools. Then, an allocation rate is determined
based on the estimated usage of the cost driver for that pool. Then the costs are allocated to each product
based on that product's cost driver usage.
11. The traditional method of applying overhead does not allocate overhead as precisely as with the ABC
method. Management relies on the costing information when setting selling prices and bidding on service
jobs. If the costing method is not accurate, some products may be considered profitable under traditional
allocation, when those products are actually operating at a loss.
13. While variable costing is not acceptable for financial reporting purposes, some managers prefer variable
costing because they believe fixed costs are period costs and do not change during the period. Variable
costing separates variable and fixed manufacturing overhead, and using only variable costs allows them to
make decisions based on the more reliable variations in unit costs.
15. Yes, as long as the system computes the amount of fixed manufacturing overhead per unit. The total
amount can be expensed under variable costing and assigned to overhead produced during absorption
costing. This will allow a portion to be included in ending inventory for absorption costing and not included for
variable costing.

Chapter 7

Multiple    Choice

1. D
3. A
5. B
7. D
9. C
11. C
13. C
15. A
17. C

Questions

1. A budget is a written financial plan for a set period, which is typically a year. There are several different types
of budgets including the master budget, operating budget, financial budget, flexible budget, and operating
budget.
3. This approach begins at the lowest levels of management. These managers know the details involved with
their departments. This allows for more accurate budget estimates when management understands how their
department contributes to the company's goals. Disadvantages include that this type of budgeting takes time,
which leads to more labor costs, and when management doesn't fully understand how it contributes to the
company goals, the budget may support the department and not the company.
5. Operating budgets plan the primary operations of the business and need accurate information in order to
provide accurate planning. Assumptions such as sales in units, sales price, desired ending inventory in units,
manufacturing costs per unit, which include direct material needed per unit, desired direct materials ending
inventory, amount of direct labor hours and rate, and the overhead required for production and managing the
company.
7. The budgeted income statement includes the estimated revenue and expenses for the company. Using
historical data on cash collections helps plan when the cash will be received and is used to develop the cash
collections schedule. The company applies its payment policies on its purchases and other items requiring
cash expenditures. This creates the cash payments schedule. Information from the cash collections schedule,
cash payments schedule, and the capital expense budget are combined to develop the cash budget. The
information from the cash budget and the ending balance sheet from the preceding year are used to develop
the budgeted balance sheet.
9. A. cash budget; B. cash receipts budget; C. production budget; D. cash payments schedule; E. capital assets
budget
11. This budget is the plan for the purchase and disposal of plant assets and lists the estimated dollar amounts
for each.
13. Before the time period begins, the organization's goals should be defined so the budget can be set to
achieve the goals. During the time period, the results should be properly measured and reported so necessary
changes can be made during the year. Then, the results of the operations can be evaluated and compared to
726                                                                               Answer Key

the original budget and organization's goals.

Chapter 8

Multiple  Choice

1. A
3. A
5. A
7. C
9. C
11. A
13. C
15. B
17. A
19. B
21. C
23. A
25. B

Questions

1. The expected price of materials per unit and the expected quantity usage are needed to help determine a
standard.
3. Fixed overhead and variable overhead should be considered.
5. Paying more or less than the standard price
7. Buying a different quality level of material; good or bad purchasing/negotiation
9. A direct labor rate variance is the actual rate paid being different from the standard rate.
11. Employees have a different level of experience than standards; the labor market is tighter or looser than
expected; contract renegotiation.
13. Total direct labor variance = (Actual hours × Actual rate) - (Standard hours × Standard rate) or the total
direct labor variance is also found by combining the direct labor rate variance and the direct labor time
variance.
15. The difference between the actual and standard amounts of the allocation base cause variable overhead
efficiency variance.
17. It is caused by paying or using less than the standard amount.
19. It may not be a good outcome when buying substandard material or hiring substandard employees.
21. Causes may include substandard material, quantity discount, negotiated better price, quantity discount, or
price drop.
23. Causes may include higher-quality material, better-qualified employees, or a change in manufacturing
process.
25. Causes may include less-qualified employees or a change in quality level of employees due to a change in
process.
27. Causes may include better material, higher-quality employees, or a change in process.

Chapter 9

Multiple  Choice

1. B
3. A
5. C
7. C
9. A
11. C
13. B
15. D
17. D
19. B

Questions

1. A management control system allows management to establish, implement, and monitor the organization's
achievement of strategic goals. Once the goals are developed, goals must be communicated throughout the
organization and activities of the organization should align to achieve the strategic goals. The control system

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Answer Key                                                                                                  727

must also provide feedback and allow for alterations, as necessary, to the organization's strategic goals.
3. Centralized organizations reserve decision-making authority for top management. Decentralized
organizations disperse decision-making throughout the organization. Companies of all sizes may exhibit
tendencies for both centralized and decentralized decision-making. For example, while Apple might give its
stores great latitude to meet customer needs, the company will reserve research and development activities
for the highest levels of the organization.
5. Daily decisions are frequent and usually have a short-term impact. Strategic decisions are infrequent and
usually have a long-term impact. Daily decisions impact the operational effectiveness and efficiency of the
organization while strategic decisions address the long-term aspect of the business. For example, daily
decisions for a grocery store might relate to signage, displays, and inventory levels to maintain. Strategic
decisions for a grocery store might include whether or not to offer online ordering or leasing in-store space to
other businesses such as a coffee shop, nail salon, or bank.
7. These activities represent a significant cost to the organization, require specialization, relate to strategic and
quality goals, and allow for benefits related to buying power. Also, there is the possibility that without
centralizing some of these costs, they might experience a significant cost overrun. For example, the company
might want to finance capital improvements, and they often can do so less expensively, in terms of interest
rates, by packaging bonds into one issue. Similar cost savings and improvements in operational efficiencies
could probably be identified in the other examples listed.
9. Answers will vary. Sample answer: McDonald's might have a policy that all stores must sell items at a price
set by the company. The purpose of this is to prevent stores from competing with each other based on price
and causing confusion or frustration with customers.
11. Answers will vary. Responses should include factors relating to establishing a competitive pay rate based
on the local economy, hiring experienced workers, investing in training, and other factors necessary to ensure
the store's success.
13.

Netflix has three segments: Domestic Streaming, International Streaming, and Domestic DVD. Responses

should present the following information:

Domestic Streaming          2017        2016        2015

Paid memberships            54,750      47,905      43,401

Revenues                    $6,153,025  $5,077,307  $4,180,339

Contribution profit/(loss)  $2,280,454  $1,838,686  $1,375,500

International Streaming     2017        2016        2015

Paid memberships            62,832      41,185      27,438

Revenues                    $5,089,191  $3,211,095  $1,953,435

Contribution profit/(loss)  $226,589    ($308,521)  ($333,386)

Domestic DVD                2017        2016        2015

Paid memberships            3,380       4,029       4,787

Revenues                    $450,497    $542,267    $645,737

Contribution profit/(loss)  $249,972    $279,525    $321,829

Responses may note that Domestic Streaming memberships, revenues, and contribution profit are all
increasing. International streaming is experiencing significant increases in memberships and revenues, but
the contribution loss continues (the loss decreased from 2016 to 2017). The Domestic DVD segment is
experiencing declining memberships, revenues, and contribution profit.

15. Answers will vary. Responses should include an organizational chart for a decentralized structure that
728                                                                                            Answer Key

includes three divisions: residential, corporate, and nonprofit. Under each of these divisions would be the
mowing, trimming, and landscaping activities. Alternative responses may present three divisions: mowing,
trimming, and landscaping activities with the client categories (residential, corporate, and nonprofit) below
each. This is less desirable due to inefficiency. The advantage of this approach is the speed of decision-making
and responding to clients. Lavell would need to ensure the quality of the services remains at a high standard.
17. Answers will vary. One example is the transportation division in a school system. The goal of the
transportation division is to manage costs while maintaining safety in transporting students.
19. Answers will vary. The benefits of an ROI structure include consideration for the segment's investment and
evaluation of management's ability to generate profitability. In addition, this framework incentivizes
management to undertake value-added investments. A disadvantage is that the segment may prioritize the
segment over company financial goals.
21. Answers will vary. Managers can influence controllable costs but have little or no ability to influence
uncontrollable costs. While it is common to include uncontrollable (including allocated) costs in the financial
information of the responsibility center, managers should be evaluated only on controllable costs.
23. Answers will vary. An advantage of a market-based approach is that the company remains up-to-date on
current cost levels. This allows the business to compare its current cost structure to the market and to identify
areas where changes are necessary. A disadvantage is this approach is that it requires a significant investment
of time and resources on the part of the business.
25. Answers will vary. An advantage of a negotiated approach is that the responsibility center management
must be actively involved in the process of establishing the transfer price. This approach may encourage
managers to remain attentive to opportunities for cost improvements. A disadvantage would include the
possibility of significant disagreements between responsibility center managers.

Chapter 10

Multiple Choice

1. B
3. D
5. B
7. B
9. D
11. A
13. A
15. B

Questions

1. Primarily disagree, but there are a few times where fixed costs can be avoided or partially avoided. Variable
costs are avoidable costs since variable costs do not exist if the product is no longer made, or if the portion of
the business (such as a segment or division) that generated the variable costs ceases to operate. Fixed costs,
on the other hand, may be unavoidable, partially unavoidable, or avoidable only in certain circumstances.
When a company discontinues a product or service, certain fixed costs may not be required.
3.

                  Cost                    Relevant or                                    Sunk, Fixed, Variable, or
                                           Irrelevant                                           Opportunity?

Rent                                      Relevant                                Fixed

Baker wages                               Relevant                                Variable

Felipe's culinary school tuition          Irrelevant                              Sunk

Berries for pies                          Relevant                                Variable

Painting dining area last year            Irrelevant                              Sunk

Felipe's decision not to attend graduate  Irrelevant                              Opportunity
school

5. One issue is the concern for how existing customers will feel if they discover that the company offered a
lower price to the special-order customer for the same goods or services. If the goods in the special order are

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Answer Key  729

modified, and thus cheaper for that reason, current customers may prefer the modified, cheaper version of
the product. The company would need to determine if selling the new version of the project would hurt
profitability or the company's reputation.
7. First and foremost, customer service quality is a consideration, followed closely by the ability of the offshore
personnel to speak clearly in English and to understand the customer's needs. Chief operating officers should
also make sure that the call centers are adequately staffed and run in an ethical manner, similar to the main
company contracting with the outsourced service. Offshoring disadvantages should be weighed against
domestic outsourcing in the areas of time zone problems, politically correct labor choices, rising labor costs
abroad, as well as culture and language.
9. The bakery manager's salary would be avoidable and therefore differential in the analysis.
11. In general, if the differential revenue from processing further is greater than the differential costs, then it
will be profitable to process a joint product after the split-off point. Any costs incurred prior to the split-off
point are irrelevant to the decision to process further, as those are sunk costs, and only future costs are
relevant costs. Joint product costs are common costs that are incurred simultaneously to produce a variety of
end products. Even though they are common costs, they are routinely allocated to the joint products.

Chapter 11

Multiple Choice

1. B
3. D
5. C
7. A
9. B
11. D
13. B
15. A

Questions

1. The process for capital decision-making involves five steps: 1. Determine capital needs. 2. Explore resource
limitations. 3. Establish baseline criteria for alternatives. 4. Evaluate alternatives using screening and
preference decisions. 5. Make the decision.
3. The company then needs to establish alternatives, which are options available for investment, and evaluate
the options using common measurement methods, including the payback method, accounting rate of return,
net present value, and internal rate of return.
5. From the standpoint of the decision to replace the asset, the book value of an existing asset is irrelevant.
Book value is just the historical cost (or value) of the asset less the total depreciation calculated to date. A gain
or loss situation often happens when the asset is sold for more or less than its book value, respectively. It is
only at that point that the company truly realizes whether they have extra value or not enough value in the
assets. This difference can provide either a gain or a loss to the company that will impact the taxes at year-end.
Therefore, gains or losses affecting tax payments, plus cash flows, are important, since cash-flow effects are
relevant in capital investment decisions.
7. It is used to determine the length of time needed for a long-term project to recapture or pay back the initial
investment in the project.
9. Advantage: The ARR compares income to the initial investment rather than to cash flows; thus, incremental
revenues, cost savings, and incremental expenses associated with the investment are reviewed and provide a
more complete picture than payback, which uses cash flows. Disadvantage: ARR is limited in that it does not
consider the value of a dollar over time.
11. Accounting Rate of Return = (Incremental revenues - Incremental expenses) ÷ Initial Investment
13. They need to know what the future value is of their investment compared to today's present value, and
what potential earnings they could see because of delayed payment.
15. The Present Value of $1 table.
17. For NPV computations, a minimum required rate of return or discount rate is used as a screening tool to
determine whether or not a capital investment decision meets a predetermined set of criteria. If the net
present value of an investment is positive, then the capital investment generates an actual return greater than
the discount rate and the project will be deemed acceptable. The discount rate, however, is not the actual rate
of return earned by the project.
The internal rate of return determines the actual rate of return that a project earns.
19. The internal rate of return (IRR) shows the profitability or growth potential of an investment. All external
factors are removed from calculation, such as inflation concerns, and the project with the highest return rate
percentage is considered for investment. A company may have several viable alternatives that need a
differentiating factor. IRR gives a solid differentiation, presented as a percentage rather than a dollar figure, as
730                                                                               Answer Key

seen in NPV. This removes bias from projects with dissimilar NPVs and is a way to compare more than one
option.
21. Answers will vary but should include something like the following: the NPV weighs the early receipt of cash
more heavily because when the receipts come in earlier, the discount is closer to 100%; however, the interest
rate also impact the NPV.
23. Strengths: It considers the time value of money, removes the dollar bias, and allows for a company to make
a decision, unlike non-time value methods. Weaknesses: It has a bias toward return rates instead of higher risk
investment consideration, uses a more difficult calculation, and does not consider the time it will take to
recoup an investment.

Chapter 12

Multiple  Choice

1. C
3. A
5. A
7. B
9. C
11. B
13. C
15. C
17. B
19. C

Questions

1. Answers will vary. Responses may focus on the short-term view versus long-term views and include
examples such as: managers focusing on only profitability might avoid spending the money for long-term
assets to fuel the future; managers may miss other opportunities like funding the expense for creation of a
customer database, if profitability is the focus in the short term; managers may avoid research and
development costs that would be used to create the next generation of their product to achieve profitability in
the short term.
3. Controllable. Responses will vary based on students' prior experiences.
5. Revenue center--the manager has control over the revenues that are generated for the corporation but not
over the costs of the organization. Cost center--the manager has control over costs but not over revenues.
Profit center--the manager has control over both revenues and costs. Investment center-- the manager has
control over revenues, costs, and capital assets.
7. Short-term goals include goals such as reducing costs of production by a certain percentage for the current
year or increasing year-over-year sales by a certain percentage. Long-term goals may include goals such as
expanding into new territories or adding new products over the next five years. A good performance
measurement system will include both short- and long-term measures in order to motivate managers to make
decisions that will fulfill both the corporations and their own short- and long-term goals.
9. Answers will vary and should lead to discussions. Goal congruence means aligning the goals of the business
with the personal goals of the manager. For example, when a company has a goal to significantly improve
sales of a certain product, the regional sales manager will have an increased sales goal as a result.
11. EVA is residual income adjusted for accounting distortions. Like residual income, it encourages managers
to make appropriate levels of investment. In addition, it treats items such as research and development costs
as having a long-term benefit to the company.
13. Answers may vary but should include some of these ideas. The idea for using both quantitative and
qualitative measures in the form of a balanced scorecard was first suggested by Art Schneiderman of Analog
Devices in 1987 and was later added to by Kaplan and Norton. The resulting design incorporated various
performance measures grouped under four categories: financial perspective, internal operations perspective,
customer perspective, and learning and growth. These areas were chosen because the success of a company
is dependent on how it performs financially, which is directly related to the company's internal operations,
how the customer perceives and interacts with the company, and the direction in which the company is
headed.

Chapter 13

Multiple Choice

1. B
3. D

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Answer Key  731

5. D
7. B
9. A
11. A
13. D
15. C

Questions

1. Sustainability is meeting the needs of the present generation without compromising the ability of future
generations to meet their own needs. Corporations can incorporate sustainability practices into their
businesses a variety of ways; through the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, efficient use of water and
scarce resources, by ensuring that employees have access to a safe working environment, adequate health
care and that they are not exploited with an imbalance of power between the employer and employee.
Responses may include a variety of suggestions.
3. An oil company might include measures as to how they would sequester excess carbon emissions in their
production phase, they may also include information about both environmental and employee safety
measures implemented. The company may also provide information on how they have improved the
communities in which they operate. A car manufacturer might include a good deal of information on
employee well-being as well as community outreach and philanthropy. The company may also provide
information on moves toward more environmentally sustainable new automobiles. A large retailer might
provide information on GHG reductions through improved energy in their value chain as well as employee
well-being programs. The company might also demonstrate its community outreach, and that products are
sourced from ethically sustainable suppliers. For example, Walmart has announced that they will no longer sell
cage eggs, selling only barn laid and free-range eggs.
5. With the exception of lenders and major shareholders, the majority of these stakeholders are not able to
command tailor made sustainability information and so are reliant upon disclosures by the organization. At
present there is little legal requirement of non-financial disclosures related to sustainability unless there are
material factors which may affect the investment decision-making of a user. (See SASB discussion on
materiality)
7. This is a difficult question. Without a mandatory framework for sustainability disclosures, companies can
produce "boilerplate reports" that look attractive and say a lot without saying too much of real substance.
However, there is increasing evidence that investors are looking for more than just financial reports and they
want to know an organization's environmental philosophy and strategy.
9. The SASB is a private sector Sustainability Accounting Standards body that aims to enhance capital market
efficiency by encouraging high-quality disclosure of material sustainability information that meets user needs.
732                                                                               Answer Key

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Index                                                                       733

Index                                capital expenditure budget, 366        contribution margin income
                                     Capital investment, 566                statement, 132
A                                    capital investment, 600                contribution margin per unit, 129
                                     carbon footprint, 673, 694             contribution margin ratio, 130,
absorption costing, 313, 323         carbon output, 664, 694                166
accounting rate of return (ARR),     cash budget, 366, 383                  Controllable costs, 481
574, 600                             cash collections schedule, 367,        controllable costs, 490
activity base, 296, 323              383                                    controllable factor, 649
activity-based costing, 294, 323     Cash flow, 571                         controllable factors, 621
Activity-based costing, 302          cash flow, 600                         controller, 31, 55
After-tax income, 634                cash inflow, 571, 600                  Controlling, 17
after-tax income, 649                cash outflow, 571, 600                 controlling, 55
allocated costs, 482, 490, 530, 541  cash payments schedule, 367, 383       conversion cost, 276
Alternatives, 567                    cash-management accountant,            conversion costs, 96, 110, 191, 229
alternatives, 600                    33, 55                                 Conversion costs, 255
annuities due, 584, 600              Centralization, 460                    corporate social responsibility,
annuity, 578, 600                    centralization, 490                    664
Asset turnover, 630                  Certified Financial Analyst (CFA),     Corporate social responsibility
asset turnover, 649                  37, 55                                 (CSR), 52
attainable standard, 407, 438        Certified Fraud Examiner (CFE),        corporate social responsibility
Automation, 45                       37, 55                                 (CSR), 55, 694
automation, 55                       Certified Government Auditing          cost accountant, 56
Average fixed cost (AFC), 87         Professional (CGAP), 38, 55            cost accountants, 33
average fixed cost (AFC), 110        Certified Internal Auditor (CIA),      cost approach, 485, 490
Average variable cost (AVC), 88      37, 55                                 cost behaviors, 83
average variable cost (AVC), 110     Certified Management                   cost center, 468, 490, 621, 649
avoidable cost, 517, 541             Accountant (CMA), 37, 55               cost driver, 85, 110, 205, 229, 299,
                                     Certified Public Accountant (CPA),     323
B                                    36, 55                                 cost equation, 101
                                     charitable giving, 675                 cost of goods manufactured, 209,
balanced scorecard, 55, 638, 649     chief executive officer (CEO), 31,     229
balanced scorecard (BSC), 50         55                                     cost of goods sold, 210, 229
Baseline criteria, 567               chief financial officer (CFO), 31, 55  cost per unit, 308
batch-level cost, 302, 323           Chili's, 186                           cost pool, 304, 323
board of directors, 31, 55           CITGO, 188                             cost-volume-profit (CVP) analysis,
bottleneck, 536, 541                 climate change, 673, 694               135
break-even point, 136, 166           Collaboration, 28                      costs of goods sold, 255
bribery, 42, 55                      collaboration, 55
Brundtland Commission Report,        Commercial awareness, 28               D
666, 694                             commercial awareness, 55
budget, 350, 383                     Common fixed costs, 318                Decentralization, 460
budget analyst, 33, 55               common fixed costs, 323                decentralization, 490
budgeted balance sheet, 371, 383     composite unit, 155, 166               differential analysis, 516, 541
budgeted income statement, 364,      Compounding, 578                       differential cost, 516, 541
383                                  compounding, 600                       differential revenue, 516, 541
business sustainability, 665, 694    constraint, 536, 541                   Direct labor, 77, 200, 295
business value, 676                  Continuous improvement, 47             direct labor, 110, 196, 229, 323
                                     continuous improvement, 55             direct labor budget, 361, 383
C                                    Contribution margin, 128               direct labor rate variance, 417,
                                     contribution margin, 166               438
capital asset, 649                                                          direct labor time variance, 418,
capital asset budget, 366, 383                                              438
Capital assets, 630
capital budgeting, 566
734                                                                               Index

direct labor variance, 416, 438       flexible budget, 374, 383, 422, 438         inventory account, 208
Direct material, 295                  flow of goods through                       Invested capital, 636
Direct materials, 77, 196             production, 189                             invested capital, 649
direct materials, 110, 196, 229, 323  Foreign Corrupt Practices Act               investment center, 475, 490, 621,
direct materials budget, 360, 383     (FCPA), 42, 56                              649
direct materials price variance,      full-cost accounting, 672, 694              irrelevant cost, 516, 541
411, 438                              future value, 578                           irrelevant revenue, 516, 541
direct materials quantity variance,   future value (FV), 579, 600
413, 438                                                                          J
direct materials variance, 411, 438   G
discount cash flow model, 586                                                     job cost sheet, 194, 218, 229
discounted cash flow model, 600       GAAP, 38, 313                               job order cost system, 217
Discounting, 579                      generally accepted accounting               Job order costing, 187
discounting, 600                      principles (GAAP), 21, 56                   job order costing, 188, 193, 229
discretionary cost center, 470, 490   Global Reporting Initiative (GRI),          joint costs, 532, 541
Dow, 188                              687                                         Just-in-time (JIT) manufacturing,
                                      globalization, 51, 56                       47
E                                     goal, 56                                    just-in-time (JIT) manufacturing,
                                      goal congruence, 483, 490, 621,             56
Economic value added (EVA), 634       649
economic value added (EVA), 649       goals, 16                                   K
effective communication, 28, 56       Government agencies, 33
Enrolled Agent (EA), 37, 56           government agency, 56                       Kaizen, 48
enterprise resource planning                                                      kaizen, 56
(ERP), 44, 56                         H                                           Kellogg's, 188
Environmental sustainability, 673
environmental sustainability, 694     H&R Block, 186                              L
equity issues, 674, 694               high-low method, 107, 110
equivalent units, 258, 276            hurdle rate, 575, 600                       lean business model, 47, 56
estimated activity base, 215, 229                                                 Lean Six Sigma (LSS), 48, 56
ethics, 39                            I                                           life-cycle, 672
Evaluating, 18                                                                    life-cycle accounting, 694
evaluating, 56                        ideal standard, 407, 438                    loss leader, 196, 229
expense recognition principle,        Incremental expenses, 575                   Lower-level management, 459
194, 229, 257, 276, 314, 323          incremental net income, 575                 lower-level management, 490
external user, 56                     Incremental revenues, 574                   lump sum, 577, 600
external users, 23                    indirect labor, 96, 110, 229, 296,
                                      323                                         M
F                                     Indirect labor, 203
                                      indirect material, 96                       management control system, 458,
factory-level cost, 302, 323          Indirect material, 296                      490
favorable variance, 408, 438          indirect materials, 110, 229, 323           Managerial accounting, 12
financial accounting, 21              Indirect materials, 203                     managerial accounting, 21, 56
Financial Accounting Standards        initial investment, 575                     manufacturing, 70
Board (FASB), 21, 56                  Institute of Management                     manufacturing costs, 191, 229,
financial analyst, 33, 56             Accountants (IMA), 38, 56                   276
financial budget, 354, 383            intangible good, 56, 110                    Manufacturing costs, 255
finished goods inventory, 207, 210    intangible goods, 43                        manufacturing organization, 74,
fixed asset, 649                      intangible products, 80                     110
Fixed assets, 636                     Integrated Reporting, 690                   Manufacturing overhead, 77, 203
fixed cost, 83, 110                   internal auditor, 33, 56                    manufacturing overhead, 110,
Fixed costs, 128, 517                 internal rate of return (IRR), 586          204, 229
fixed factory overhead variance,      internal rate of return method              manufacturing overhead budget,
428, 438                              (IRR), 600                                  362, 383
                                      internal user, 56                           manufacturing overhead costs,
                                      internal users, 23                          295, 323
                                                                                  margin of safety, 158, 166

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
Index                                                                 735

market price approach, 485, 490   operating leverage, 166             Q
Marshalls, 186                    operating overhead, 227, 229
master budget, 354, 383           opportunity costs, 520, 541         qualitative factor, 516, 541, 649
materiality, 686, 694             ordinary annuities, 600             qualitative factors, 639
materials requisition form, 197,  ordinary annuity, 582               quantitative factor, 516, 541, 649
229                               organizational chart, 30, 464, 490  quantitative factors, 638
merchandising, 70                 Outsourcing, 46, 524
merchandising firm, 71, 110       outsourcing, 57, 541                R
metric, 622, 649                  overapplied overhead, 221, 229
metrics, 638                      overhead, 196, 204                  radio-frequency identification
Mid-level management, 459         overhead costs, 192                 (RFID), 46, 57
mid-level management, 490         overhead rate, 213                  raw materials inventory, 199, 207,
minimum required rate of return,  overhead variances, 421             208
633, 649                                                              relevant cost, 516, 541
mission statement, 15, 57         P                                   relevant range, 90, 110, 128, 166,
Mixed costs, 88                                                       521, 541
mixed costs, 110                  P/E ratio, 681, 694                 relevant revenue, 516, 541
monetary accounting               Paris Climate Agreement, 664, 694   renewable energy, 678, 694
information, 26, 57               payback method (PM), 570, 600       reporting, 22, 24, 25
multi-product environment, 154,   performance measure, 649            Residual income (RI), 479
166                               performance measurement             residual income (RI), 490, 633, 649
multiplier effect, 162, 166       system, 622, 649                    Responsibility accounting, 467
                                  performance measures, 622           responsibility accounting, 490,
N                                 period cost, 192                    620, 649
                                  Period costs, 94                    responsibility centers, 467, 490
negotiated price approach, 486,   period costs, 110, 229, 255, 276    Return on investment, 477
490                               Pet Smart, 186                      return on investment (ROI), 490,
Net present value (NPV), 586      planning, 16, 57                    630, 649
net present value method (NPV),   predetermined overhead              revenue center, 470, 490, 621, 649
600                               allocation rate, 213                Robinson-Patman Act, 522
non-renewable resources, 674,     predetermined overhead rate,        rolling budget, 353, 383
694                               296
Non-time value methods, 570       preference decision, 568, 600       S
non-time value methods, 600       present value, 578
nonmonetary accounting            Present value (PV), 583             sales budget, 358, 383
information, 27, 57               present value (PV), 600             Sales margin, 630
nonprofit (not-for-profit)        price-earnings ratio, 681           sales margin, 649
organization, 57                  Primary users, 681                  sales mix, 154, 166
Nonprofit (not-for-profit)        Prime costs, 96, 255                Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX), 57
organizations, 34                 prime costs, 110, 191, 229, 276     Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (SOX),
normal capacity, 521, 541         process costing, 188, 188, 276      41
                                  Process costing, 252                scatter graph, 105, 110
O                                 Product costs, 93                   screening decision, 568, 600
                                  product costs, 110, 255, 276        SEC, 38
objective, 57                     product-level cost, 302, 323        secondary users, 681
objectives, 16                    production budget, 359, 383         segment, 490, 528, 541
operating asset, 649              production cost report, 267, 276    segments, 464
Operating assets, 636             productive asset, 649               Selling and administrative (S&A)
operating budget, 354, 383        Productive assets, 636              expenses, 257
Operating budgets, 357            profit center, 470, 490, 621, 649   selling and administrative (S&A)
operating expense, 566            profit margin percentage, 476       expenses, 276
operating expenses, 600                                               Selling and administrative costs,
operating income, 636, 649                                            192
Operating leverage, 160                                               selling and administrative
                                                                      expense budget, 363, 383
736                                                                               Index

sensitivity analysis, 147, 166       total fixed costs, 85, 110                   work in process inventory, 195,
service, 70                          Total quality management (TQM),              199, 207, 209
service industries, 227              47
service organization, 80, 110        total quality management (TQM),              Z
Sherwin Williams, 188                57
short-term decision analysis, 515,   total variable costs, 85, 110                Zero-based budgeting, 351
541                                  total variable overhead cost                 zero-based budgeting, 383
social contract, 685, 694            variance, 426, 438
Sony, 227                            Traditional allocation, 295
special order, 541                   traditional allocation, 311, 323
special orders, 521                  transfer pricing, 483, 491
split-off point, 532, 541            treasurer, 31, 57
spoilage, 265, 276                   triple bottom line, 672
stakeholder, 649, 694                triple bottom line (TBL), 694
Stakeholders, 640                    Turkey Hill, 188
stakeholders, 671
standard, 406, 438                   U
standard cost, 406, 438
static budget, 375, 383              unavoidable cost, 517, 541
stepped cost, 90, 110                Uncontrollable costs, 482
stockholder, 649                     uncontrollable costs, 491
Stockholders, 640                    uncontrollable factor, 649
strategic goals, 458                 uncontrollable factors, 621
strategic plan, 622, 649             underapplied overhead, 221, 229
strategic planning, 16, 57           unfavorable variance, 408, 438
sunk cost, 518, 541                  unit contribution margin, 129,
sustainability, 52, 57, 664, 694     536, 541
Sustainability Accounting            unit contribution margin per
Standards Board (SASB), 689          production restraint, 536, 541
sustainability report, 665, 694      unit-level cost, 302, 323
sustainable development, 666,        Upper management, 459
694                                  upper management, 491

T                                    V

tangible good, 57, 110               variable cost, 85, 110
tangible goods, 43                   Variable costing, 313
tangible products, 80                variable costing, 323
target pricing, 148, 166             Variable costs, 128, 517
technology, 44                       variable overhead efficiency
theory of constraints (TOC), 49, 57  variance, 425, 438
time ticket, 229                     variable overhead rate variance,
time tickets, 201                    423, 438
time value of money, 577, 600        variance, 406, 438
Titleist, 188                        Variance analysis, 378
total contribution margin, 131,      variance analysis, 429
166
total cost, 85, 110                  W
total direct labor variance, 419,
438                                  weighted average cost of capital,
total direct materials cost          650
variance, 414, 438                   weighted average cost of capital
                                     (WACC), 634
                                     whistleblower, 57
                                     Whistleblowers, 41

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25479/1.11
