Principles of Finance

SENIOR CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS

JULIE DAHLQUIST, TEXAS CHRISTIAN UNIVERSITY
RAINFORD KNIGHT, FLORIDA ATLANTIC UNIVERSITY
OpenStax
Rice University
6100 Main Street MS-375
Houston, Texas 77005

To learn more about OpenStax, visit https://openstax.org.
Individual print copies and bulk orders can be purchased through our website.

©2022 Rice University. Textbook content produced by OpenStax is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0). Under this license, any user of this textbook or the textbook
contents herein must provide proper attribution as follows:

- If you redistribute this textbook in a digital format (including but not limited to PDF and HTML), then you
    must retain on every page the following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you redistribute this textbook in a print format, then you must include on every physical page the
    following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you redistribute part of this textbook, then you must retain in every digital format page view (including
    but not limited to PDF and HTML) and on every physical printed page the following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you use this textbook as a bibliographic reference, please include
    https://openstax.org/details/books/principles-finance in your citation.

For questions regarding this licensing, please contact support@openstax.org.

Trademarks
The OpenStax name, OpenStax logo, OpenStax book covers, OpenStax CNX name, OpenStax CNX logo,
OpenStax Tutor name, Openstax Tutor logo, Connexions name, Connexions logo, Rice University name, and
Rice University logo are not subject to the license and may not be reproduced without the prior and express
written consent of Rice University.

HARDCOVER BOOK ISBN-13       978-1-711470-53-5
B&W PAPERBACK BOOK ISBN-13   978-1-711470-52-8
DIGITAL VERSION ISBN-13      978-1-951693-54-1
ORIGINAL PUBLICATION YEAR    2022
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 JAY 22
OPENSTAX

OpenStax provides free, peer-reviewed, openly licensed textbooks for introductory college and Advanced
Placement® courses and low-cost, personalized courseware that helps students learn. A nonprofit ed tech
initiative based at Rice University, we're committed to helping students access the tools they need to complete
their courses and meet their educational goals.

RICE UNIVERSITY

OpenStax, OpenStax CNX, and OpenStax Tutor are initiatives of Rice University. As a leading research university
with a distinctive commitment to undergraduate education, Rice University aspires to path-breaking research,
unsurpassed teaching, and contributions to the betterment of our world. It seeks to fulfill this mission by
cultivating a diverse community of learning and discovery that produces leaders across the spectrum of human
endeavor.

PHILANTHROPIC SUPPORT

OpenStax is grateful for the generous philanthropic partners who advance our mission to improve educational
access and learning for everyone. To see the impact of our supporter community and our most updated list of
partners, please visit openstax.org/impact.

Arnold Ventures                                  Burt and Deedee McMurtry
Chan Zuckerberg Initiative                       Michelson 20MM Foundation
Chegg, Inc.                                      National Science Foundation
Arthur and Carlyse Ciocca Charitable Foundation  The Open Society Foundations
Digital Promise                                  Jumee Yhu and David E. Park III
Ann and John Doerr                               Brian D. Patterson USA-International Foundation
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation                  The Bill and Stephanie Sick Fund
Girard Foundation                                Steven L. Smith & Diana T. Go
Google Inc.                                      Stand Together
The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation         Robin and Sandy Stuart Foundation
The Hewlett-Packard Company                      The Stuart Family Foundation
Intel Inc.                                       Tammy and Guillermo Treviño
Rusty and John Jaggers                           Valhalla Charitable Foundation
The Calvin K. Kazanjian Economics Foundation     White Star Education Foundation
Charles Koch Foundation                          Schmidt Futures
Leon Lowenstein Foundation, Inc.                 William Marsh Rice University
The Maxfield Foundation
  Study where you want, what
   you want, when you want.

                        When you access your book in our web view, you can use our new online
                         highlighting and note-taking features to create your own study guides.

                                               Our books are free and flexible, forever.
                               Get started at openstax.org/details/books/principles-finance

Access. The future of education.
openstax.org
  CONTENTS

    Preface 1

1 Introduction to Finance 7

        Why It Matters 7
        1.1 What Is Finance? 8
        1.2 The Role of Finance in an Organization 14
        1.3 Importance of Data and Technology 16
        1.4 Careers in Finance 18
        1.5 Markets and Participants 21
        1.6 Microeconomic and Macroeconomic Matters 23
        1.7 Financial Instruments 25
        1.8 Concepts of Time and Value 28
        Summary 31
        Key Terms 32
        Multiple Choice 33
        Review Questions 36
        Video Activity 36

2 Corporate Structure and Governance 39

        Why It Matters 39
        2.1 Business Structures 40
        2.2 Relationship between Shareholders and Company Management 44
        2.3 Role of the Board of Directors 46
        2.4 Agency Issues: Shareholders and Corporate Boards 50
        2.5 Interacting with Investors, Intermediaries, and Other Market Participants 54
        2.6 Companies in Domestic and Global Markets 56
        Summary 59
        Key Terms 59
        CFA Institute 61
        Multiple Choice 61
        Review Questions 64
        Video Activity 64

3 Economic Foundations: Money and Rates 67

        Why It Matters 67
        3.1 Microeconomics 68
        3.2 Macroeconomics 76
        3.3 Business Cycles and Economic Activity 82
        3.4 Interest Rates 86
        3.5 Foreign Exchange Rates 89
        3.6 Sources and Characteristics of Economic Data 91
              Summary 95
              Key Terms 95
              CFA Institute 96
              Multiple Choice 96
              Review Questions 98
              Problems 98
              Video Activity 98

     4 Accrual Accounting Process 101

              Why It Matters 101
              4.1 Cash versus Accrual Accounting 102
              4.2 Economic Basis for Accrual Accounting 104
              4.3 How Does a Company Recognize a Sale and an Expense? 107
              4.4 When Should a Company Capitalize or Expense an Item? 111
              4.5 What Is "Profit" versus "Loss" for the Company? 121
              Summary 124
              Key Terms 124
              Multiple Choice 125
              Review Questions 126
              Problems 126
              Video Activity 127

     5 Financial Statements 129

              Why It Matters 129
              5.1 The Income Statement 130
              5.2 The Balance Sheet 134
              5.3 The Relationship between the Balance Sheet and the Income Statement 138
              5.4 The Statement of Owner's Equity 141
              5.5 The Statement of Cash Flows 143
              5.6 Operating Cash Flow and Free Cash Flow to the Firm (FCFF) 148
              5.7 Common-Size Statements 149
              5.8 Reporting Financial Activity 156
              Summary 158
              Key Terms 159
              CFA Institute 159
              Multiple Choice 160
              Review Questions 161
              Problems 161
              Video Activity 162

     6 Measures of Financial Health 165

              Why It Matters 165
              6.1 Ratios: Condensing Information into Smaller Pieces 166

Access for free at openstax.org
        6.2 Operating Efficiency Ratios 167
        6.3 Liquidity Ratios 172
        6.4 Solvency Ratios 174
        6.5 Market Value Ratios 176
        6.6 Profitability Ratios and the DuPont Method 182
        Summary 186
        Key Terms 186
        CFA Institute 187
        Multiple Choice 187
        Review Questions 188
        Problems 189
        Video Activity 189

7 Time Value of Money I: Single Payment Value 191

        Why It Matters 191
        7.1 Now versus Later Concepts 192
        7.2 Time Value of Money (TVM) Basics 193
        7.3 Methods for Solving Time Value of Money Problems 196
        7.4 Applications of TVM in Finance 214
        Summary 222
        Key Terms 222
        CFA Institute 223
        Multiple Choice 223
        Review Questions 224
        Problems 224
        Video Activity 225

8 Time Value of Money II: Equal Multiple Payments 227

        Why It Matters 227
        8.1 Perpetuities 228
        8.2 Annuities 231
        8.3 Loan Amortization 239
        8.4 Stated versus Effective Rates 243
        8.5 Equal Payments with a Financial Calculator and Excel 246
        Summary 257
        Key Terms 257
        CFA Institute 258
        Multiple Choice 258
        Problems 260
        Video Activity 261

9 Time Value of Money III: Unequal Multiple Payment Values 263

        Why It Matters 263
              9.1 Timing of Cash Flows 264
              9.2 Unequal Payments Using a Financial Calculator or Microsoft Excel 271
              Summary 278
              Key Terms 278
              CFA Institute 278
              Multiple Choice 278
              Review Questions 279
              Problems 280
              Video Activity 281

    10 Bonds and Bond Valuation 283

              Why It Matters 283
              10.1 Characteristics of Bonds 284
              10.2 Bond Valuation 288
              10.3 Using the Yield Curve 296
              10.4 Risks of Interest Rates and Default 301
              10.5 Using Spreadsheets to Solve Bond Problems 306
              Summary 313
              Key Terms 313
              CFA Institute 315
              Multiple Choice 315
              Review Questions 317
              Problems 317
              Video Activity 318

    11 Stocks and Stock Valuation 319

              Why It Matters 319
              11.1 Multiple Approaches to Stock Valuation 320
              11.2 Dividend Discount Models (DDMs) 325
              11.3 Discounted Cash Flow (DCF) Model 341
              11.4 Preferred Stock 343
              11.5 Efficient Markets 345
              Summary 347
              Key Terms 347
              CFA Institute 349
              Multiple Choice 349
              Review Questions 350
              Problems 350
              Video Activity 351

    12 Historical Performance of US Markets 353

              Why It Matters 353
              12.1 Overview of US Financial Markets 354

Access for free at openstax.org
         12.2 Historical Picture of Inflation 362
         12.3 Historical Picture of Returns to Bonds 366
         12.4 Historical Picture of Returns to Stocks 370
         Summary 376
         Key Terms 376
         Multiple Choice 377
         Review Questions 378
         Video Activity 379

13 Statistical Analysis in Finance 381

         Why It Matters 381
         13.1 Measures of Center 382
         13.2 Measures of Spread 385
         13.3 Measures of Position 390
         13.4 Statistical Distributions 392
         13.5 Probability Distributions 396
         13.6 Data Visualization and Graphical Displays 400
         13.7 The R Statistical Analysis Tool 406
         Summary 411
         Key Terms 412
         CFA Institute 413
         Multiple Choice 413
         Review Questions 414
         Problems 415
         Video Activity 415

14 Regression Analysis in Finance 417

         Why It Matters 417
         14.1 Correlation Analysis 418
         14.2 Linear Regression Analysis 424
         14.3 Best-Fit Linear Model 427
         14.4 Regression Applications in Finance 431
         14.5 Predictions and Prediction Intervals 434
         14.6 Use of R Statistical Analysis Tool for Regression Analysis 438
         Summary 442
         Key Terms 442
         Multiple Choice 443
         Review Questions 444
         Problems 445
         Video Activity 447

15 How to Think about Investing 449

         Why It Matters 449
              15.1 Risk and Return to an Individual Asset 450
              15.2 Risk and Return to Multiple Assets 458
              15.3 The Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) 461
              15.4 Applications in Performance Measurement 465
              15.5 Using Excel to Make Investment Decisions 467
              Summary 472
              Key Terms 472
              CFA Institute 473
              Multiple Choice 473
              Review Questions 474
              Problems 475
              Video Activity 476

    16 How Companies Think about Investing 479

              Why It Matters 479
              16.1 Payback Period Method 480
              16.2 Net Present Value (NPV) Method 482
              16.3 Internal Rate of Return (IRR) Method 486
              16.4 Alternative Methods 488
              16.5 Choosing between Projects 490
              16.6 Using Excel to Make Company Investment Decisions 496
              Summary 501
              Key Terms 501
              CFA Institute 502
              Multiple Choice 502
              Review Questions 503
              Problems 503
              Video Activity 504

    17 How Firms Raise Capital 507

              Why It Matters 507
              17.1 The Concept of Capital Structure 508
              17.2 The Costs of Debt and Equity Capital 509
              17.3 Calculating the Weighted Average Cost of Capital 512
              17.4 Capital Structure Choices 516
              17.5 Optimal Capital Structure 520
              17.6 Alternative Sources of Funds 523
              Summary 529
              Key Terms 529
              CFA Institute 530
              Multiple Choice 530
              Review Questions 532
              Problems 532
              Video Activity 533

Access for free at openstax.org
18 Financial Forecasting 535

         Why It Matters 535
         18.1 The Importance of Forecasting 536
         18.2 Forecasting Sales 541
         18.3 Pro Forma Financials 544
         18.4 Generating the Complete Forecast 546
         18.5 Forecasting Cash Flow and Assessing the Value of Growth 550
         18.6 Using Excel to Create the Long-Term Forecast 554
         Summary 559
         Key Terms 559
         Multiple Choice 560
         Review Questions 561
         Problems 562
         Video Activity 563

19 The Importance of Trade Credit and Working Capital in Planning 565

         Why It Matters 565
         19.1 What Is Working Capital? 566
         19.2 What Is Trade Credit? 575
         19.3 Cash Management 577
         19.4 Receivables Management 579
         19.5 Inventory Management 583
         19.6 Using Excel to Create the Short-Term Plan 584
         Summary 590
         Key Terms 590
         Multiple Choice 592
         Review Questions 594
         Video Activity 597

20 Risk Management and the Financial Manager 599

         Why It Matters 599
         20.1 The Importance of Risk Management 600
         20.2 Commodity Price Risk 602
         20.3 Exchange Rates and Risk 604
         20.4 Interest Rate Risk 614
         Summary 618
         Key Terms 618
         CFA Institute 619
         Multiple Choice 619
         Review Questions 621
         Problems 621
         Video Activity 622

     Index 623
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                 Preface 1

Preface

About OpenStax

OpenStax is part of Rice University, which is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit charitable corporation. As an educational
initiative, it's our mission to transform learning so that education works for every student. Through our
partnerships with philanthropic foundations and our alliance with other educational resource companies,
we're breaking down the most common barriers to learning. Because we believe that everyone should and can
have access to knowledge.

About OpenStax Resources

Customization

Principles of Finance is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY) license, which
means that you can distribute, remix, and build upon the content, as long as you provide attribution to
OpenStax and its content contributors.

Because our books are openly licensed, you are free to use the entire book or select only the sections that are
most relevant to the needs of your course. Feel free to remix the content by assigning your students certain
chapters and sections in your syllabus, in the order that you prefer. You can even provide a direct link in your
syllabus to the sections in the web view of your book.

Instructors also have the option of creating a customized version of their OpenStax book. The custom version
can be made available to students in low-cost print or digital form through their campus bookstore. Visit the
Instructor Resources section of your book page on OpenStax.org for more information.

Art Attribution

In Principles of Finance, most art contains attribution to its title, creator or rights holder, host platform, and
license within the caption. Because the art is openly licensed, anyone may reuse the art as long as they provide
the same attribution to its original source.

To maximize readability and content flow, some art does not include attribution in the text. If you reuse
illustrations, graphs, or charts from this text that do not have attribution provided, use the following
attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license.

Errata

All OpenStax textbooks undergo a rigorous review process. However, like any professional-grade textbook,
errors sometimes occur. Writing style guides and other contextual frameworks also change frequently. Since
our books are web-based, we can make updates periodically when deemed pedagogically necessary. If you
have a correction to suggest, submit it through the link on your book page on OpenStax.org. Subject matter
experts review all errata suggestions. OpenStax is committed to remaining transparent about all updates, so
you will also find a list of past errata changes on your book page on OpenStax.org.

Format

You can access this textbook for free in web view or PDF through OpenStax.org, and for a low cost in print.

About Principles of Finance

Summary

Principles of Finance is targeted at the core finance course for undergraduate business majors. The book is
designed for conceptual accessibility to students who are relatively early in their business curriculum (such as
second-year students), yet it is also suitable for more advanced students. Due to the wide range of audiences
and course approaches, the book is designed to be as flexible as possible. Its modular structure allows the
introduction and review of content from prerequisite subjects in financial accounting, statistics, and
2 Preface

economics, depending on student preparation. It provides a solid grounding in the core concepts of financial
theory so that business students interested in a major or minor in finance will also be prepared for more
rigorous upper-level courses. Concepts are further reinforced through applicable connections and practical
calculation techniques for more detailed and realistic company scenarios from various industries.

Pedagogical Foundation

Principles of Finance emphasizes financial concepts relevant to people working in a variety of business
functions. To illuminate the meaningful applications and implications of financial ideas, the book incorporates
a unique use-case approach, providing connections among topics, solutions, and real-world problems. This
multifaceted framework drives the integration of concepts while maintaining a modular chapter structure.
Theoretical and practical aspects are presented in a balanced manner, and select ethical considerations are
introduced, particularly in the context of corporate governance.

In order to create meaning for all students, Principles of Finance exposes them to a range of companies,
industries, and scenarios reflecting different contexts. Examples of large companies such as Apple, Peloton,
and American Airlines are balanced with small businesses--coffee shops, clothing stores, and salons--that
may be more aligned with student experiences. The text includes authentic narratives from corporate finance,
small business, and personal finance to drive relevance and interest of the discipline. Profiles and interviews
include diverse figures in finance, such as Carlos Slim, Irina Simmons, Janet Yellen, and Ben Bernanke.
Problems and exercises have been carefully constructed to place students into a range of settings and
contexts as they develop knowledge and put it into practice. Finally, to reflect very recent experiences, the
authors have incorporated several discussions regarding the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on people
and businesses.

Throughout, there is an emphasis on data use in business decision-making, with integrative sections on the
importance and analysis of financial, economic, and statistical data. Data types include FRED
(https://openstax.org/r/fred-stlouisfed)® economic data, company financial statements, and stock prices.
Practical techniques and calculation examples for data analysis with financial calculators (the Texas
Instruments BA II PlusTM Professional model is used as the basis for example illustrations) and/or spreadsheets
are included for relevant topics. For key chapters, downloadable Microsoft® Excel® data files are available for
student reference. This technical feature provides students with access to the Excel data files used in the
chapter examples for time value of money (Chapters 7, 8, 9) and statistics (Chapters 14, 15, 16) problems. The
downloadable files for the chapters covering financial forecasting and trade credit (18 and 19) allow students
to see how changing assumptions and variables impact financial decision-making. Chapters 13 and 14
(statistical and regression analysis, respectively) also include brief sections about the R software
(https://openstax.org/r/r-software) package to promote further interest in trends in data science.

Teaching Plan Options

Principles of Finance includes chapters on basic, applied, and integrative finance topics as well as key concepts
from prerequisite financial accounting, quantitative methods (statistics), and economics courses. The chapters
on prerequisite topics highlight examples relevant to finance students. For instructors with a limited one-
semester schedule or whose students have solid knowledge of prerequisite disciplines, we recommend
focusing on the "core" chapters, as indicated in the following table of contents:

           1 Introduction to Finance                Core
           2 Corporate Structure and Governance     Core
           3 Economic Foundations: Money and Rates  Extension
           4 Accrual Accounting Process             Extension

           Table 1

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             Preface 3

5 Financial Statements                                      Core

6 Measures of Financial Health                              Core

7 Time Value of Money I: Single Payment Value               Core

8 Time Value of Money II: Equal Multiple Payments           Core

9 Time Value of Money III: Unequal Multiple Payment Values  Core

10 Bonds and Bond Valuation                                 Core

11 Stocks and Stock Valuation                               Core

12 Historical Performance of US Markets                     Core

13 Statistical Analysis in Finance                          Extension

14 Regression Analysis in Finance                           Extension

15 How to Think about Investing                             Core

16 How Companies Think about Investing                      Core

17 How Firms Raise Capital                                  Core

18 Financial Forecasting                                    Core

19 The Importance of Trade Credit and Working Capital in Planning Extension

20 Risk Management and the Financial Manager                Extension

Table 1

Although chapters are written to be independent, they do generally build on the understanding in the
previous core chapters. Please bear this in mind when considering alternate sequences.

Key Features to Drive Understanding

  · Concepts in Practice presents examples of financial challenges, managerial decisions, and the range of
      accepted business practice in companies and industries.

  · Think It Through guides students through the process of applying the concepts in the chapter to
      analyzing and interpreting data.

  · Link to Learning introduces students to online resources (further reading, data sources, or videos) that
      are pertinent to students' exploration of the topic at hand.

Organizational and Reinforcement Materials to Support Learning

  · Learning Outcomes. Every section begins with a set of clear and concise learning outcomes (LOs). These
      outcomes are designed to help the instructor decide what content to include or assign and to guide
      students on what they can expect to learn.

  · Why It Matters. Chapter opening examples include real-world topics from corporate finance, small
      business, and personal finance to explain the relevance and interest of the topic for students.

  · CFA® Institute. For certain chapters, a topical connection to the learning outcome statements (LOS) for
      the Level I Study Sessions (https://openstax.org/r/level1-study-session) of the CFA Institute's professional
      curriculum is indicated at the end of the chapter.

  · Summaries. Designed to support both students and instructors, chapter summaries distill the
      information in each section down to key, concise points.

  · Key Terms. Key terms are bold and are followed by an explanation in context. Definitions of key terms are
      also listed in a glossary that appears at the end of each module online and at the end of each chapter in
      print.

  · Assessments. A mix of multiple-choice questions, short-answer review questions, and quantitative
      problems is provided, depending on topic, providing opportunities for students to recall, discuss, and
4 Preface

          examine the concepts learned in each chapter.
            Multiple-choice questions are basic review questions that test comprehension.
            Short-answer questions are brief open-response questions that allow the application of concepts or

              critical thinking.
            Quantitative problems range from single-variable to multistep or multivariable calculations,

              depending on the difficulty and application level of the chapter.
            Sample answers and solutions are provided as part of the instructor resources.

      · Video Activity. This optional interactive activity at the end of every chapter provides reflection questions
          for students to apply to two online YouTube videos that offer a variety of corporate, economic,
          government, and skills-based examples and perspectives.

   About the Authors

    Senior Contributing Authors

    Julie Dahlquist, Texas Christian University
    Dr. Dahlquist is a professor of professional practice in the Finance Department of the Neeley School of
    Business at Texas Christian University. She holds a PhD from Texas A&M University, an MA from St. Mary's
    University, a BBA from the University of Louisiana at Monroe, and a Chartered Market Technician® (CMT)
    designation. Previously, she served on the finance faculties of the University of Texas at San Antonio and St.
    Mary's University. She has extensive international experience teaching finance to undergraduate, graduate,
    and executive MBA students in programs in Mexico, Austria, Germany, Switzerland, Italy, Belgium, Greece, and
    South Korea. Dr. Dahlquist is president of the Technical Analysis Educational Foundation (TAEF), which works
    with universities to include technical analysis as an integral part of their finance curricula. She has coauthored
    Technical Analysis: The Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians (with Charles Kirkpatrick, 3rd
    edition, FT Press, 2015) and has contributed to many other scholarly publications. Her research has appeared
    in Financial Analysts Journal, Managerial Finance, Applied Economics, Working Money, Financial Practices and
    Education, and the Journal of Financial Education. Dr. Dahlquist has served as editor of the Journal of Technical
    Analysis, a member of the editorial board of the Southwestern Business Administration Journal, and a reviewer
    for several other journals.

    Rainford Knight, Florida Atlantic University
    Dr. Knight is adjunct faculty in the Finance Department of the College of Business at Florida Atlantic University
    and the director of its Financial Analyst Program, which he founded in partnership with Bloomberg in 2011. He
    holds a BBA, an MBA, and a PhD in finance from Florida Atlantic University. Dr. Knight is a member of the CFA
    Institute and a former director of the CFA Society of South Florida. He has extensive experience teaching
    finance at the undergraduate, graduate, and executive levels. Previously, he served on the finance faculty of
    Fairleigh Dickinson University. Dr. Knight has coauthored articles on corporate sustainability, cost-benefit
    analyses, mutual fund returns, and CEO compensation. He also has significant private industry experience in
    corporate finance, investment management, and hedge funds. He has been an adviser to CEOs of small to
    midsize companies on a variety of issues, including restructurings, valuation, financing, and acquisitions.
    Internationally, he was part of the consulting team advising a sovereign government on the restructuring of its
    financial sector and has also made presentations regarding financial sector restructuring to central banks in
    Latin America. Since 2021, Dr. Knight has been CEO and cofounder of Transparency Invest, which supports
    accountability in organizations.

    Contributing Authors

    Alan S. Adams, Dean College

    Curtis J. Bacon, Southern Oregon University

    Samantha T. Cooper, Buena Vista University

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                 Preface 5

Michael P. Griffin, University of Massachusetts Dartmouth
Kevin C. Higgins, Maryville University
Larry Musolino, Pennsylvania State University
Reviewers
Curtis J. Bacon, Southern Oregon University
John Paul Broussard, Rutgers University
Jeffrey M. Brown, Johnson University
Raul S. Consunji, Salem State University
Aaron Cook, Pennsylvania State University
Samantha T. Cooper, Buena Vista University
Ramon P. DeGennaro, University of Tennessee
Francis H. Dong, formerly of The Catholic University of America
Wayne Durr, Western New England University
Fernando Garcia, California State University
Lenaye Harris, Utah State University
Kevin C. Higgins, Maryville University
Samira Hussein, Johnson County Community College
Jiya L. Jain, University of Maryland Global Campus
Robert Jozkowski, Eckerd College
Kristin Burke Martin, Franklin University
Michael McDonald, Fairfield University
Harini Mittal, Bronx Community College, City University of New York
Andrew Jason Novak, Southern New Hampshire University
Daniel E. Rhem, Pitt Community College
Sanjay Sharma, Columbia University
Dennis C. Shea, Upper Iowa University
Jere Smith, Southern New Hampshire University
Tih Koon Tan, University of the District of Columbia
Wilson Zehr, Eastern Oregon University
Additional Resources
We've compiled additional resources for instructors, including PowerPointTM lecture slides, an instructor's
manual, a test bank, and a solution guide. Instructor resources require a verified instructor account, which you
can apply for when you log in or create your account on OpenStax.org.
Instructor resources are typically available within a few months after the book's initial publication. Take
advantage of these resources to supplement your OpenStax book.
6 Preface

    Community Hubs
    OpenStax partners with the Institute for the Study of Knowledge Management in Education (ISKME) to offer
    Community Hubs on OER Commons--a platform for instructors to share community-created resources that
    support OpenStax books, free of charge. Through our Community Hubs, instructors can upload their own
    materials or download resources to use in their own courses, including additional ancillaries, teaching
    material, multimedia, and relevant course content. We encourage instructors to join the hubs for the subjects
    most relevant to your teaching and research as an opportunity both to enrich your courses and to engage with
    other faculty. To reach the Community Hubs, visit www.oercommons.org/hubs/openstax.
    Technology Partners
    As allies in making high-quality learning materials accessible, our technology partners offer optional low-cost
    tools that are integrated with OpenStax books. To access the technology options for your text, visit your book
    page on OpenStax.org.

     Access for free at openstax.org
1 · Why It Matters                                                                                                                    7

 1
              Introduction to Finance

Figure 1.1 Finance is the linchpin that connects and directs many parts of a business or organization. (credit: modification of work
"Finance behind the Glass" by Max London/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline

  1.1 What Is Finance?
  1.2 The Role of Finance in an Organization
  1.3 Importance of Data and Technology
  1.4 Careers in Finance
  1.5 Markets and Participants
  1.6 Microeconomic and Macroeconomic Matters
  1.7 Financial Instruments
  1.8 Concepts of Time and Value

      Why It Matters

Finance is essential to the management of a business or organization. Without good financial protocol,
safeguards, and tools, running a successful business is more difficult. In 1978, Bacon Signs was a family-
owned, regional Midwestern sign company engaged in the manufacture, sale, installation, and maintenance of
commercial signage. The company was about to transition from the second to third generation of family
ownership. Bacon Signs, established in 1901, had weathered the Great Depression, World War II, the Vietnam
War, and the oil embargo and was working its way through historically high rates of inflation and interest
rates. The family business had successfully struggled through the ebb and flow of the regional and national
economy by providing quality products and service to its regional clients.

In the early 1980s, the company's fortunes changed permanently for the better. The owner recognized that
the custom signs built by his firm were superior in quality to the signs it installed for national franchises. The
owner worked with the company's banker and vice president of finance and operations to develop a
production, sales, and financing plan that could be offered to the larger national sign companies. The larger
companies agreed to subcontract manufacturing of midsize orders to Bacon Signs. The firm then made a
commitment to build and deliver these signs on time and under budget. As Bacon Signs' reputation for quality
grew, so did demand for its products. The original financing plan anticipated this potential growth and was
8 1 · Introduction to Finance

    designed to meet anticipated capital requirements so that the firm could expand how and when it needed to.
    Bacon Signs' ability to manufacture and deliver a high-quality product at a good price was the true value of the
    firm. However, without the planning and ability to raise capital facilitated by the financing plan, the firm would
    not have been able to act on its strengths at the critical moment. Financing was the key to expansion and
    financial stability for the firm.1
    In this book, we demonstrate that business finance is about developing and understanding the tools that help
    people make consistently good and repeatable decisions.

    1.1 What Is Finance?

   Learning Outcomes

    By the end of this section, you will be able to:
      · Describe the main areas in finance.
      · Explain the importance of studying finance.
      · Discuss the concepts of risk and return.

   Definition of Finance

    Finance is the study of the management, movement, and raising of money. The word finance can be used as a
    verb, such as when the First National Bank agrees to finance your home mortgage loan. It can also be used as
    a noun referring to an entire industry. At its essence, the study of finance is about understanding the uses and
    sources of cash, as well as the concept of risk-reward trade-off. Finance is also a tool that can help us be better
    decision makers.

   Basic Areas in Finance

    Finance is divided into three primary areas in the domestic market: business finance, investments, and
    financial markets and institutions (see Figure 1.2). We look at each here in turn.

                                                            Figure 1.2 The Three Basic Areas of Study in Finance

    Business Finance
    Business finance looks at how managers can apply financial principles to maximize the value of a firm in a
    risky environment. Businesses have many stakeholders. In the case of corporations, the shareholders own the
    company, and they hire managers to run the company with the intent to maximize shareholder wealth.
    Consequently, all management decisions should run through the filter of these questions: "How does this
    decision impact the wealth of the shareholders?" and "Is this the best decision to be made for shareholders?"
    In business finance, managers focus on three broad areas (see Figure 1.3).

     1 Dun & Bradstreet. "Bacon Signs, Inc." D&B Business Directory. https://www.dnb.com/business-directory/company-
     profiles.bacon_signs_inc.90df737e33956dd7c76717a20e9d56ad.html#financials-anchor

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            1.1 · What Is Finance? 9

1. Working capital management (WCM) is the study and management of short-term assets and liabilities.
      The chief financial officer (CFO) and the finance team are responsible for establishing company policy for
      how to manage WCM. The finance department determines credit policy, establishes minimum criteria for
      the extension of credit to clients, terms of lending, when to extend, and when to take advantage of short-
      term creditor financing. The accounting department basically implements the finance department's
      policies. In many firms, the accounting and finance functions operate in the same department; in others,
      they are separate.

2. Capital budgeting is the process of determining which long-term or fixed assets to acquire in an effort to
      maximize shareholder value. Capital budgeting decisions add the greatest value to a firm. As such, capital
      budgeting is thought to be one of the most important financial functions within a firm. The capital
      budgeting process consists of estimating the value of potential investments by forecasting the size,
      timing, and risk of cash flows associated with the investments. The finance department develops and
      compiles cash flow estimates with input from the marketing, operations, accounting, human resources,
      and economics departments to develop a portfolio of investment projects that collectively maximize the
      value of the firm.

3. Capital structure is the process by which managers focus more specifically on long-term debt and
      increasing shareholder wealth. Capital structure questions require financial managers to work with
      economists, lenders, underwriters, investment bankers, and other sources of external financial
      information and financial capital. When Bacon Signs developed its financial plan, the executives included
      each of these three aspects of business finance into the plan.

                          Figure 1.3 How Corporate Finance Decision-Making Activities Relate to the Balance Sheet

Figure 1.3 demonstrates how the three essential decision-making activities of the financial manager are
related to a balance sheet. Working capital management focuses on short-term assets and liabilities, capital
budgeting is focused on long-term assets, and capital structure is concerned with the mix of long-term debt
and equity financing.
Investments
Investments are products and processes used to create and grow wealth. Most commonly, investment topics
include the discussion and application of the different types of financial instruments, delivery vehicles,
regulation, and risk-and-return opportunities. Topics also include a discussion of stocks, bonds, and derivative
securities such as futures and options. A broad coverage of investment instruments would include mutual
funds, exchange-traded funds (ETFs), and investment vehicles such as 401k plans or individual retirement
accounts (IRAs). In addition, real assets such as gold, real estate, and commodities are also common
discussion topics and investment opportunities.
Investments is the most interesting area of finance for many students. Television programs such as Billions
and movies such as Wall Street make investing appear glamorous, dangerous, shady, or intoxicating,
10 1 · Introduction to Finance

      depending on the situation and the attitude of the viewer. In these programs, the players and their decisions
      can lead to tremendous wealth or tremendous losses. In reality, most of us will manage our portfolios well shy
      of the extremes portrayed by the entertainment industry. However, we will need to make personal and
      business investment decisions, and many students reading this material will work in the investment industry
      as personal investment advisers, investment analysts, or portfolio managers.

      Financial Markets and Institutions

      Financial markets and institutions are the firms and regulatory agencies that oversee our financial system.
      There is overlap in this area with investments and business finance, as the firms involved are profit seeking
      and need good financial management. They also are commonly the firms that facilitate investment practices in
      our economy. A financial institution regulated by a federal or state agency will likely handle an individual
      investment such as the purchase of a stock or mutual fund.

      Much of the US regulatory structure for financial markets and institutions developed in the 1930s as a
      response to the stock market crash of 1929 and the subsequent Great Depression. In the United States, the
      desire for safety and protection of investors and the financial industry led to the development of many of our
      primary regulatory agencies and financial regulations. The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) was
      formed with the passage of the Securities Act of 1933 and Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Major bank
      regulation in the form of the Glass-Steagall Act (1933) and the Banking Act of 1935 gave rise to government-
      backed bank deposit insurance and a more robust Federal Reserve Bank.

      These regulatory acts separated investment banking from commercial banking. Investment banks and
      investment companies continued to underwrite and facilitate new bond and equity issues, provide financial
      advice, and manage mutual funds. Commercial banks and other depository institutions such as savings and
      loans and credit unions left the equity markets and reduced their loan portfolios to commercial and personal
      lending but could purchase insurance for their primary sources of funds, checking, and savings deposits.

      Today, the finance industry barely resembles the structure your parents and grandparents grew up and/or
      worked in. Forty years of deregulation have reshaped the industry. Investment and commercial bank
      operations and firms have merged. The separation of activities between investment and commercial banking
      has narrowed or been eliminated. Competition from financial firms abroad has increased, and the US financial
      system, firms, and regulators have learned to adapt, change, and innovate to continue to compete, grow, and
      prosper.

      The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) formed in 2007 to consolidate and replace existing
      regulatory bodies. FINRA is an independent, nongovernmental organization that writes and enforces the rules
      governing registered brokers and broker-dealer firms in the United States. The Securities Investor
      Protection Corporation (SIPC) is a nonprofit corporation created by an act of Congress to protect the clients
      of brokerage firms that declare bankruptcy. SIPC is an insurance that provides brokerage customers up to
      $500,000 coverage for cash and securities held by the firm.

      The regulation of the financial industry kicked into high gear in the 1930s and for those times and conditions
      was a necessary development of our financial industry and regulatory oversight. Deregulation of the finance
      industry beginning in the 1970s was a necessary pendulum swing in the opposite direction toward more
      market-based and less restrictive regulation and oversight. The Great Recession of 2007-2009 resulted in the
      reregulation of several aspects of the financial industry. Some would argue that the regulatory pendulum has
      swung too far toward deregulation and that the time for more or smarter regulation has returned.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            1.1 · What Is Finance? 11

 CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

 The Great Recession

  The Great Recession of 2007-2009 exposed many of the weaknesses of our financial system. The ease with
  which banks could lower credit standards to allow ill-prepared consumers to purchase real estate and the
  resulting speed with which the world economy plunged into recession is astounding.

  Regulation to address the economic crisis was also swift. Fortunately, Ben Bernanke, chairman of the
  Federal Reserve at the time, had throughout his career conducted extensive research into the causes of and
  potential resolution of the Great Depression of the 1930s.2 He was uniquely qualified to lead the economic
  response to the crisis. Some resulting laws moved to address the immediate needs and others to correct
  the underlying causes of the recession.

  One immediate fix was the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP). TARP authorized the Treasury to buy
  illiquid assets in order to save the financial institutions so important to lubricating our economy. Politically
  this was a tough decision, as it appeared that the government bailed out greedy bankers. In the end,
  however, the program was justified because the economy immediately began a slow but steady recovery,
  most financial institutions did not fail, and the Treasury recouped all of its investment used in the bailout.
  However, individual homeowners suffered greatly.

  The Dodd-Frank Act of 2008 attempted to address many of the underlying causes of the Great Recession by
  reorganizing and toughening the regulatory framework, including tighter oversight of critically important
  financial institutions. Dodd-Frank also created the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) to protect
  consumers from harm caused by unscrupulous banking activities. Today, the hope is that financial
  institutions will be stopped short of the gross negligence evident prior to 2007 and consumers won't be left
  out in the cold due to actions beyond their control.

  Sources: History Channel. "Here's What Caused the Great Recession." YouTube. May 15, 2018.
  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yM0uonkloXY. Accessed April 18, 2021; Randall D. Guynn, Davis Polk,
  and Wardwell LLP, "The Financial Panic of 2008 and Financial Regulatory Reform." Harvard Law School
  Forum on Corporate Governance. November 20, 2010. https://corpgov.law.harvard.edu/2010/11/20/the-
  financial-panic-of-2008-and-financial-regulatory-reform/. Accessed April 18, 2021; Sean Ross. "What Major
  Laws Were Created for the Financial Sector Following the 2008 Crisis?" Investopedia. Updated March 31,
  2020. https://www.investopedia.com/ask/answers/063015/what-are-major-laws-acts-regulating-financial-
  institutions-were-created-response-2008-financial.asp. Accessed April 18, 2021.

Why We Study Finance

Finance is the lubricant that keeps our economy running smoothly. Issuing a mortgage can be profitable for a
bank, but it also allows people to live in their own homes and to pay for them over time. Do MasterCard,
Venmo, and PayPal make money when you use their product? Sure, but think how much more convenient and
safer it is to carry a card or use an app instead of cash. In addition, these services allow you to easily track
where and how you spend your money. A well-regulated and independent financial system is important to
capital-based economies. Our smoothly functioning financial system has removed us from the days of strictly
bartering to our system today, where transactions are as simple as a tap on your mobile phone.

There are any number of professional and personal reasons to study finance. A search of the internet provides
a long list of finance-related professions. Interviews with senior managers reveal that an understanding of
financial tools and concepts is an important consideration in hiring new employees. Financial skills are among

2 Brookings Institution. "Ben S. Bernanke." Brookings Institute. https://www.brookings.edu/experts/ben-s-bernanke/; Ben S.
Bernanke. "On Milton Friedman's 90th Birthday." The Federal Reserve Board. November 8, 2002. https://www.federalreserve.gov/
boarddocs/speeches/2002/20021108/
12 1 · Introduction to Finance

      the most important tools for advancement toward greater responsibility and remuneration. Government and
      work-guaranteed pension benefits are growing less common and less generous, meaning individuals must
      take greater responsibility for their personal financial well-being now and at retirement. Let's take a closer
      look at some of the reasons why we study finance.

      There are many career opportunities in the fields of finance. A single course in finance such as this one may
      pique your interest and encourage you to study more finance-related topics. These studies in turn may qualify
      you for engaging and high-paying finance careers. We take a closer look at financial career opportunities in
      Careers in Finance.

      A career in finance is just one reason to study finance. Finance is an excellent decision-making tool; it requires
      analytical thinking. Further, it provides a framework for estimating value through an assessment of the timing,
      magnitude, and risk of cash flows for long-term projects. Finance is important for more immediate activities as
      well, such as the development of budgets to assure timely distribution of cash flows such as dividends or
      paychecks.

      An understanding of finance and financial markets opens a broader world of available financial investment
      opportunities. At one time, commercial bank deposits and the occasional investment in stocks, bonds, real
      estate, or gold may have provided sufficient coverage of investment opportunities, portfolio diversification,
      and adequate returns. However, in today's market of financial technology, derivative securities, and
      cryptocurrencies, an understanding of available financial products and categories is key for taking advantage
      of both new and old financial products.

      LINK TO LEARNING

      Job Information

        The internet provides a wealth of information about types of jobs in finance, as well as reasons to study it.
        Investigate the Occupational Outlook Handbook (https://openstax.org/r/bls-gov) issued by the Bureau of
        Labor Statistics to see how many of the career opportunities in finance look interesting to you. Think about
        the type of people you want to work with, the type of work-related activities you enjoy, and where you
        would like to live. Read "5 Reasons Why You Should Study Finance" at Harvard Business School Online
        (https://openstax.org/r/why-study-finance) to gain a better understanding of why finance offers a broad
        career path and is intellectually stimulating and satisfying.

     Risk and Return in Finance

      Finance tells us that an increase in risk results in an increase in expected return. The study of historical
      financial markets demonstrates that this relationship generally holds true and that riskier investments over
      time have provided greater returns. Of course, this is not true all the time and under all conditions; otherwise,
      where's the risk?

      At its most basic level, risk is uncertainty. The study of finance attempts to quantify risk in a way that helps
      individuals and organizations assess an appropriate trade-off for risk. Risk-return tradeoffs are all around us in
      our everyday decision-making. When we consider walking across the street in the middle of a city block or
      walking down to the marked intersection, we are assessing the trade-off between convenience and safety.
      Should you buy the required text for your class or instead rely on the professor's notes and the internet?
      Should you buy that new-to-you used car sight unseen, or should you spend the money for a mechanic to
      assess the vehicle before you buy? Should you accept your first job offer at graduation or hold out for the offer
      you really want? A better understanding of finance makes these types of decisions easier and can provide you,
      as the decision maker, with statistics instead of just intuition.

      Return is compensation for making an investment and waiting for the benefit (see Figure 1.4). Return could be

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            1.1 · What Is Finance? 13

the interest earned on an investment in a bond or the dividend from the purchase of stock. Return could be
the higher income received and the greater job satisfaction realized from investing in a college education.
Individuals tend to be risk averse. This means that for investors to take greater risks, they must have the
expectation of greater returns. Investors would not be satisfied if the average return on stocks and bonds
were the same as that for a risk-free savings account. Stocks and bonds have greater risk than a savings
account, and that means investors expect a greater average return.
The study of finance provides us with the tools to make better and more consistent assessments of the risk-
return trade-offs in all decision-making, but especially in financial decision-making. Finance has many different
definitions and measurements for risk. Portfolios of investment securities tend to demonstrate the
characteristics of a normal return distribution, or the familiar "bell-shaped" curve you studied in your statistics
classes. Understanding a security's average and variability of returns can help us estimate the range and
likelihood of higher- or lower-than-expected outcomes. This assessment in turn helps determine appropriate
prices that satisfy investors' required return premiums based on quantifiable expectations about risk or
uncertainty. In other words, finance attempts to measure with numbers what we already "know."

Figure 1.4 Risk and Expected Return This describes the trade-off that invested money can bring higher profits if the investor is
willing to accept the risk of possible loss.

The overall uncertainty of returns has several components.
  · Default risk on a financial security is the chance that the issuer will fail to make the required payment. For
      example, a homeowner may fail to make a monthly mortgage payment, or a corporation may default on
      required semiannual interest payments on a bond.
  · Inflation risk occurs when investors have less purchasing power from the realized cash flows from an
      investment due to rising prices or inflation.
  · Diversifiable risk, also known as unsystematic risk, occurs when investors hold individual securities or
      smallish portfolios and bear the risk that a larger, more well-rounded portfolio could eliminate. In these
      situations, investors carry additional risk or uncertainty without additional compensation.
  · Non-diversifiable risk, or systematic risk, is what remains after portfolio diversification has eliminated
     unnecessary diversifiable risk. We measure non-diversifiable risk with a statistical term called beta.
      Subsequent chapters on risk and return provide a more in-depth discussion of beta.
  · Political risk is associated with macroeconomic issues beyond the control of a company or its managers.
      This is the risk of local, state, or national governments "changing the rules" and disrupting firm cash
      flows. Political risk could come about due to zoning changes, product liability decisions, taxation, or even
      nationalization of a firm or industry.
14 1 · Introduction to Finance

     1.2 The Role of Finance in an Organization

     Learning Outcomes

      By the end of this section, you will be able to:
        · Describe the finance function.
        · Explain the role of finance and its importance within an organization.

     The Finance Function

      Finance has many functions within an organization, and there are many job titles to reflect the varied job
     responsibilities. The comptroller, or more commonly a controller, in a for-profit business relies heavily on a
      knowledge of accounting. Controllers are in charge of financial reporting and the oversight of the accounting
      activities necessary to develop those reports. Controllers are concerned with payroll functions, accounts
      receivable, and accounts payable including taxes, inventory control, and any number of short-term asset and
      liability tracking and monitoring activities. They aid internal and external auditors and are responsible for
      monitoring and implementing the day-to-day financial operations of the firm.

      In most organizations, the treasurer might assume many of the duties of the controller. However, the
      treasurer is also responsible for monitoring cash flow at a firm and frequently is the contact person for
      bankers, underwriters, and other outside sources of financing. A treasurer may be responsible for structuring
      loan and debt obligations and determining when and from whom to borrow funds. Treasurers are also
      responsible for investing excess funds. Where a controller may face inward toward the organization, the
      treasurer often faces outward as a representative to the public.

      The vice president of finance (VP-F) is an executive-level position and oversees the activities of the controller
      and treasurer. The chief responsibility of the VP-F is to create and mentor a sufficient and qualified staff that
      generates reports that are timely, accurate, and thorough.

      The chief financial officer, or CFO, is in a "big picture" position. The CFO sets policy for working capital
      management, determines optimal capital structure for the firm, and makes the final decision in matters of
      capital budgeting. The CFO is also forward looking and responsible for strategic financial planning and setting
      financial goals. Compared to a VP-F, a CFO is less of a "hands-on" manager and engages more in visionary and
      strategic planning.

     Financial Planning

      Financial planning is critical to any organization, large or small, private or public, for profit or not-for-profit.
      Financial planning allows a firm to understand the past, present, and future funding needs and distributions
      required to satisfy all interested parties. For-profit businesses work to maximize the wealth of the owners.
      These could be shareholders in a publicly traded corporation, the owner-managers of a "mom and pop" store,
      partners in a law firm, or the principal owners of any other number of business entities. Financial planning
      helps managers understand the firm's current status, plan and create processes and contingencies to pursue
      objectives, and adjust to unexpected events. The more thoughtful and thorough the financial planning
      process, the more likely a firm will be able to achieve its goals and/or weather hard times. Financial plans
      typically consider the firm's strategic objectives, ethical practices, and sources and costs of funds, as well as
      the development of budgets, scenarios, and contingencies. The financial plan Bacon Signs developed was
      thorough enough to anticipate when and how growth might occur. The plan that was presented to commercial
      banks allowed the firm to be guaranteed new financing at critical moments in the firm's expansion.

      Good financial planning has a number of common features.

        · It uses past, current, and pro forma (forward-looking) income statements. Pro forma income statements
            are created using assumptions from past events to make projections for future events. These income
            statements should develop likely scenarios and provide a sensitivity analysis of key assumptions.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                           1.2 · The Role of Finance in an Organization 15

  · Cash flow statements are a critical part of any financial planning. Cash flow statements estimate the
      timing and magnitude of actual cash flows available to meet financial obligations.

  · Balance sheets are critical for demonstrating the sources and uses of funds for a firm. One of the most
      important aspects of business is accounting (see Figure 1.5).

  · Forecasting in the form of expected sales, cost of funds, and microeconomic and macroeconomic
      conditions are essential elements of financial planning.

  · Financial analysis including ratio analysis, common-size financial statements, and trend statements are
      important aspects of financial planning. Such analysis aids in the understanding of where a firm has been,
      how it stacks up against the competition, and the assessment of target objectives.

Figure 1.5 The Accounting System The accounting system relies on accurate data used to prepare all the financial reports that help
to evaluate a firm.

 LINK TO LEARNING
 Elements of a Financial Plan

  You can view key elements in a financial plan (https://openstax.org/r/write-your-business-plan) at the US
  Small Business Administration's website.

Forecasting and Budgeting

Forecasting and budgeting are common practices for businesses, governmental agencies, not-for-profit firms,
and individual households. As with many of the financial topics introduced in this chapter, these activities are
valuable for individuals and businesses alike. Budgeting, or planning for the amount, sources, and uses of
cash, occurs early in the planning process. It is common for businesses to have developed an annual budget
well before the start of the year. With budgeting, a firm establishes objectives for the upcoming period by
developing financial statements based on historical data and expectations, as well as aspirations for the
future. The budgeting process helps the firm identify what actions need to be undertaken to achieve its
objectives. However, no matter how strong the budgeting process, actual events can change the timing and
magnitude of expected cash flows.
Financial forecasting addresses the changes necessary to the budgeting process. Budgeting can help identify
the differences or variance from expectations, and forecasting becomes the process for adapting to those
changes. We attribute to President Eisenhower the saying that "plans are worthless, but planning is
everything." That statement applies to business today as well as it did during his service in the military and
government. The budgeting or planning process is a road map for organizations, and forecasting helps
navigate the inevitable detours toward the firm's objectives.
The budgeting process develops pro forma financial statements such as income and cash flow statements and
balance sheets. These provide benchmarks to determine if firms are on course to meet or exceed objectives
and serve as a warning if firms are falling short. Budgeting should involve all departments within a firm to
16 1 · Introduction to Finance

      determine sources and uses of funds and required funding to meet department and firm objectives. The
      process should look to emulate successful processes and change or eliminate ineffective ones. Budgeting is a
      periodic renewal and reminder of the firm's goals.

      Financial forecasting often starts with the firm's budget and recommends changes based on differences
      between the budgeted financial statements and actual results. Forecasting adjusts management behavior in
      the immediate term and serves as a foundation for subsequent budgets.

     1.3 Importance of Data and Technology

     Learning Outcomes

      By the end of this section, you will be able to:
        · Describe the role of data in finance.
        · List and describe the various types of corporate data available.
        · Explain how the various types of corporate data can be accessed and analyzed.
        · Describe the impact of data digitization.
        · Explain how stakeholders use data when making decisions.

     Importance of Data

      Financial data is important for internal and external analysis of business firms. More accurate and timely data
      leads to better business and financial decision-making. Financial budgeting and forecasting rely on the
      creation of several types of financial statements including income statements, the statements of cash flow,
      and balance sheets, as well as the notes and assumptions used to create the financial statements. Insiders
      such as executive and middle managers use financial data to evaluate and reevaluate decision-making. Having
      current and accurate data is key to making consistent value-adding decisions for a firm. Data helps inform
      managers about how and when to finance projects, which projects to undertake, and necessary changes to
      make regarding physical, financial, and human resource assets. "Gut feelings" and "seat-of-the-pants"
      decision-making tend to be inconsistent with value maximization.

      Outsiders also use publicly available data about firms to make purchasing, investment, credit, and regulatory
      decisions. Customers, investors, lenders, suppliers, and regulators must be able to access a firm's financial
      information. Investors need to determine how much they are willing to pay for a share of stock, banks need
      data to determine if a loan should be made, suppliers need financial information to determine if they should
      supply trade credit, and customers need to know that a firm has priced its products appropriately.

     Basic Data Types

      Financial statements provide some of the data needed for decision-making. Firms summarize data and
      develop at least three essential financial statements or reports.

      1. The income statement summarizes the flow of revenues and expenses over a specified period. Income
            statements for publicly traded companies are available quarterly.

      2. Statements of cash flow identify actual receipt and use of cash over a period.
      3. Balance sheets show the existing assets, liabilities, and equity as of a particular date.

      These statements represent book values and reflect historical costs and accounting adjustments such as
      accumulated depreciation. Book values often differ significantly from market values. Market values look
      forward and reflect expectations, whereas book values represent what has occurred.

      In addition to the internal data summarized on financial statements, firms and outside stakeholders also seek
      external sources of information. External data gathering includes surveys of customers and suppliers, market
      research, new product development, statistical analysis, agreements with creditors, and discussions with
      government officials. Broader macroeconomic data is also valuable as it applies to expected market demand,
      unemployment, inflation, interest rates, and economic growth.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                               1.3 · Importance of Data and Technology 17

The Impact of Digitization

Data digitization makes the storage and transmission of data easier and more cost effective. Some data starts
out as digital data, such as that from a Microsoft Suite product. The Excel files and Word documents we create
are ubiquitous and easily stored and transmitted. Cloud storage and video conferencing are now the norm.
Emails and Zoom meetings are quick, easy, and inexpensive ways to share and store information. Businesses
now create an e-trail, or virtual paper trail, to document, verify, and share processes. Because data is now
much easier to access, firms bear the added responsibility of ensuring that it is stored and secured properly so
that individuals cannot inappropriately alter or delete information.

Data storage has changed significantly in the last decade as companies have moved the storage of digital data
to the cloud. The advantages include only paying for the storage actually used, reduced energy consumption,
access to specialized data protection services, and software and hardware maintenance. However, the risk of
data hacks and the safety of data are key concerns in the storage of digitized information.

Uses of Data

Taken together and separately, the internally generated financial statements can provide managers with a
wealth of information to enable superior decision-making. Harvard Business School identifies six ways
managers can use financial statements.3

1. Measuring the impact of business decisions such as new software, marketing plan, or product line
2. Aiding in the development of budgets by creating a starting point for future expectations
3. Aiding in cost cutting or the reduction of duplicate activities
4. Providing data-supported strategic planning and visioning
5. Ensuring consistent data and content across departments
6. Motivating teams to set, meet, and exceed goals and objectives

 CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

 How and Why Managers Use Financial Statements: The Case of Peloton

  Should you lease a new car or buy one? Do you opt for the more expensive high-tech production
  equipment or reduce your upfront investment and pay higher labor costs over time? Is it better to finance a
  new product by borrowing money or selling new shares of stock? Should you manufacture overseas where
  the production costs are lower or in your own country where political and transportation costs are lower?
  Once you make your choice, how do you know if you've made the right decision? Understanding and
  applying financial principles can help.

  For example, consider Peloton, the leader in social exercising with its bike, treadmill, and yoga platforms. In
  2012, the principal founder, John Foley, was inspired to start the company because he lacked the time to
  attend bicycle exercise classes due to his demanding career and growing family. He enjoyed cycling classes,
  but they could be expensive and often did not fit into his schedule. He recognized that the most popular
  instructors had developed a bit of a cult following and that the music playlist was a critical component for
  many followers. His choice of the company name, Peloton, comes from the French word for a "pack of bike
  riders," familiar to anyone who has even loosely followed the annual Tour de France bike race. The
  company name evokes a measure of mystique and prestige.

  Peloton started small and underwent five funding rounds in seven years before the company went public
  with an initial public offering in September 2019. Foley and his friends had the idea that they were a
  "purposeful music company" and needed to touch on all aspects of the workout experience including the

3 Catherine Cote. "How and Why Managers Use Financial Statements." Business Insights. June 16, 2020. https://online.hbs.edu/
blog/post/how-managers-use-financial-statements
18 1 · Introduction to Finance

        bike; video, audio, and music content; clothing design; competition among the riders; data gathering; and
        instructors for livestream and on-demand classes. They were selling an experience, not a bicycle. The
        equipment is expensive--a Peloton bike typically costs over $2,000. Peloton equips its studios with state-of-
        the-art camera and music systems and pays its instructors top dollar. Along the way, the founders made
        several critical financial decisions. They kept control of the firm by using private funding at the start.

        How can we tell if Peloton has managed its resources well? The company started with $400,000 of funding
        to develop a prototype in 2012. By 2018, firm value increased to $4 billion with yet another round of private
        investor funding. As of April 2021, Peloton is a publicly traded company with a stock value of $34 billion. The
        executives are sacrificing profits in the short term to generate growth and long-term profitability. The firm
        uses its financial statements to identify sources and uses of funds, to test the effectiveness of advertising,
        and to forecast future profitability. Analysts like the firm, the stock price is up, and by many financial
        measures, Peloton has been a great success. Time will tell if the decisions made over the last several years
        will lead to long-term profitability or if the company has overinvested in marketing only to miss current and
        long-term profits.

        (Sources: Viktor. "The Peloton Business Model--How Does Peloton Work & Make Money?" Productmint.
        Updated May 9, 2021. https://productmint.com/the-peloton-business-model-how-does-peloton-make-
        money/. Accessed May 18, 2021; John Ballard. "If You Invested $5,000 in Peloton's IPO, This Is How Much
        Money You'd Have Now." The Motley Fool. June 6, 2020. https://www.fool.com/investing/2020/06/06/if-you-
        invested-5000-in-pelotons-ipo-this-is-how-m.aspx. Accessed May 18, 2021; Erin Griffith. "Peloton's New
        Infusion Made It a $4 Billion Company in Six Years." New York Times. August 3, 2018.
        https://www.nytimes.com/2018/08/03/technology/pelotons-new-infusion-made-it-a-4-billion-company-
        in-6-years.html)

     1.4 Careers in Finance

     Learning Outcomes

      By the end of this section, you will be able to:
        · Describe current job opportunities in finance.
        · Describe the financial analyst role.
        · Describe the business analyst role.

     Job Opportunities in Finance: Market Trends

      There are many career opportunities in the field of finance. The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) finds that as of
      May 2020, the median income for finance-related positions was $72,250 versus the overall median income of
      only $41,950. Further, the BLS predicts that close to an additional 500,000 new finance- and accounting-related
      jobs will be created by 2029.4 These new employment opportunities are in addition to the many openings that
      will become available as baby boomers continue to retire and leave the workforce.

      Several of the BLS-listed finance careers do not even have finance or associated wording in the career titles.
      The BLS identifies finance skills as necessary for careers such as management analysts and market research
      analysts and work in logistics. Of course, many careers traditionally encourage the study of finance. These
      include job titles and descriptions such as these:

        · Financial manager: Oversees aspects of and produces reports about an organization's financial needs,
            uses, and related activities

        · Investment relations associate: Prepares and presents company financial data to investors and other
            company stakeholders

       4 U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Occupational Outlook Handbook. https://www.bls.gov/ooh/business-and-financial/home.htm

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          1.4 · Careers in Finance 19

  · Budget analyst: Reviews, plans, and evaluates an organization's financial activities
  · Credit analyst: Reviews financial and related information to determine the creditworthiness of potential

      clients and customers; typically works at commercial and investment banks, credit unions, and rating firms
      such as Moody's or Standard and Poor's
  · Financial analyst: Collects and examines data to plan future activities and evaluate past decisions
  · Personal financial advisor: Provides advice to clients for short-, intermediate-, and long-term financial
      planning
  · Loan officer: Helps individuals and organizations apply for loans and typically works for depository
      financial institutions such as commercial banks
  · Insurance underwriter: Evaluates risk and establishes prices for insurance products such as life, property,
      and casualty insurance
  · Financial examiner: Evaluates and monitors the activities of depository institutions in an effort to assure
      proper practice and behavior
  · Finance professor: Teaches college classes, engages in economic and financial research, and provides
      community service by serving on boards and providing financial expertise

 LINK TO LEARNING

 Best Jobs in Finance

  You can read more about possible careers in finance (https://openstax.org/r/thebalancecareers) at the
  Balance Careers website.

Financial Analyst Roles

Many executive-level finance officers worked their way up via the role of financial analyst. Job descriptions vary
across firms, industries, and government organizations. However, the role of financial analyst usually includes
market research, financial forecasting, modeling, cost analysis, and comparative valuations. Financial analysts
gather data and produce financial reports in conjunction with multiple departments within a business or
organization. They rely on marketing and production personnel to provide accurate sales forecasts, and they
work with accountants to create accurate financial reports.

As a financial analyst, you need strong spreadsheet skills, the ability to develop financial models and pro forma
financial statements, outstanding analytical skills, and an overall understanding of business processes.
Financial analysts possess a well-diversified collection of business and communication skills, both quantitative
and qualitative. Figure 1.6 lists some tasks that financial analysts must perform on a daily basis. Some firms
require an MBA or several years of business experience for their financial analysts.
20 1 · Introduction to Finance

                                                                            Figure 1.6 Financial Analyst Tasks

      Internal financial analysts are important for a successful firm or organization because their work can lead to
      more efficient and cost-effective use of financial and nonfinancial resources. Responsibilities include keeping
      current with market conditions, developing financial models, reconciling variance between forecasts and
      outcomes, and serving as a resource for management. Financial analysts fulfill their responsibilities through
      the development and analysis of financial data including ratio analysis, trend analysis, in-depth discussions
      with division managers, and the presentation and interpretation of information at meetings and on electronic
      platforms.
      External financial analysts use similar resources and tools to evaluate financial instruments as an aid to
      investment companies, investment and commercial bankers, and individual investors who rely on their
      published reports. Various government agencies also use financial analysts to aid in regulatory oversight and
      enforcement.
      A report from a 2019 BLS survey determines that financial analysts earn an average salary of $81,590, and jobs
      are predicted to grow at a faster-than-average rate of 5% through 2029.5

     Business (or Management) Analyst Roles

      The job description for a business analyst looks much like that for a financial analyst. However, the strong
      quantitative skills required for a financial analyst are less emphasized in favor of overall strategic thinking. A
      successful business analyst is able to evaluate business opportunities by using analytical thinking, industry
      best practices, process development, team building and organization, and information technology. They then
      communicate optimal courses of action to executive decision makers to maximize value in alignment with the
      vision and goals of the firm.
      Business analysts can help develop strategy and tactics to move a firm forward. They aid in identifying
      challenges and solutions. Data-driven solutions help get products to market more quickly, evaluate
      performance, and optimize production and product mix. The Bureau of Labor Statistics identifies the following
      as typical business analyst duties:

        · Gathering information about problems to be solved or procedures to be improved
        · Interviewing personnel and conducting onsite observations to determine the methods, equipment, and

       5 Ibid.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                               1.5 · Markets and Participants 21

      personnel that will be needed
  · Analyzing financial data, revenues and expenditures, and employment reports, among other data
  · Finding root causes for problems and proposing solutions that may include new systems, procedures, or

      personnel changes
  · Presenting findings to decision makers
  · Conferring with managers to ensure changes work

The average salary for management analysts was $85,260 in May 2019, and the BLS projects 11% growth, or
about 94,000 new jobs, over the next decade.6

 1.5 Markets and Participants

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Identify primary and secondary markets.
  · Identify key market players.

Primary and Secondary Markets

Simply put, the primary market is the market for "new" securities, and the secondary market is the market
for "used" securities. Think of the primary market as equivalent to the sale of new cars and the secondary
market as equivalent to the sale of used cars. In practice, many market locales trade both new and used
securities. For example, the stock markets trade equity securities daily, and most of the trading takes place
among individual and institutional investors who own shares in publicly traded companies. Trading a share of
Amazon, Facebook, or Nike stock has little impact and no direct cash flow to the underlying firm. However, the
information provided by such transactions is valuable, as it is a costly and public real-time statement by
investors of their perceptions of firm's value and a reflection of satisfaction and expectations.

Some, though many fewer, transactions in the equity market are for the purchase and sale of new securities.
Firms issue new shares of stock called seasoned equity offerings (SEOs) or initial public offerings (IPOs) into
the market. These are issues of new shares of stock, previously untraded, and their issuance sends cash flows
directly to the underlying firms. SEOs are new shares issued by established firms, and IPOs are new shares
issued by firms going public for the very first time. Once the initial transaction takes place, purchasers of these
new securities may trade them. However, the second and subsequent trades are secondary, not primary,
market transactions.

Extensive primary market transactions take place weekly, when the Treasury Department auctions billions of
dollars of new Treasury securities. These new securities repay maturing Treasury securities and provide for the
ongoing liquidity and long-term borrowing needs of the federal government. Again, subsequent trading of
this government debt occurs as secondary market transactions.

Key Market Players

Key market players in finance include dealers, brokers, financial intermediaries, and you and me. Each of these
players facilitates the exchange of products, information, and capital in different ways. The presence of these
players makes financial transactions, easier, faster, and safer--essentially more efficient. You and your friends
might engage in direct financial transactions, such as buying a coffee or borrowing money for a movie. These
are typically small transactions. However, for transactions that are larger or more complicated, you need
advanced financial entities with capital, expertise, and networks. The two segments of the secondary markets
are broker markets and dealer markets, as Figure 1.7 shows. The primary difference between broker and
dealer markets is the way each executes securities trades.

6 Ibid.
22 1 · Introduction to Finance

                                                                         Figure 1.7 Broker and Dealer Markets

      Dealers
      Financial dealers own the securities that they buy or sell. When a dealer engages in a financial transaction,
      they are trading from their own portfolio. Dealers do not participate in the market in the same manner as an
      individual or institutional investor, who is simply trying to make their investments worth as much as possible.
      Instead, dealers attempt to "make markets," meaning they are willing and able to buy and sell at the current
      bid and ask prices for a security. Rather than relying on the performance of the underlying securities to
      generate wealth, dealers make money from the volume of trading and the spread between their bid price
      (what they are willing to pay for a security) and their ask price (the price at which they are willing to sell a
      security). By standing ready to always buy or sell, dealers increase the liquidity and efficiency of the market.
      Dealers in the United States fall under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Securities and Exchange Commission
      (SEC). Such regulatory oversight ensures that dealers execute orders promptly, charge reasonable prices, and
      disclose any potential conflicts of interest with investors.
      Brokers
      Brokers act as facilitators in a market, and they bring together buyers and sellers for a transaction. Brokers
      differ from dealers who buy and sell from their own portfolio of holdings. These firms and individuals
      traditionally receive a commission on sales.
      In the world of stockbrokers, you may work with a discount broker or a full-service broker, and the fees and
      expenses are significantly different. A discount broker executes trades for clients. Brokers are required for
      clients because security exchanges require membership in the exchange to accept orders. Discount brokers or
      platforms such as Robinhood or E-Trade charge no or very low commissions on many of their trade
      executions, but they may receive fees from the exchanges. They also do not offer investment advice.
      Full-service brokers offer more services and charge higher fees and commissions than discount brokers. Full-
      service brokers may offer investment advice, retirement planning, and portfolio management, as well as
      execute transactions. Morgan Stanley and Bank of America Merrill Lynch are examples of full-service brokers
      that serve both institutional and individual investors.
      Financial Intermediaries
      A financial intermediary, such as a commercial bank or a mutual fund investment company, serves as an
      intermediary to enable easier and more efficient exchanges among transacting parties. For instance, a
      commercial bank accepts deposits from savers and investors and creates loans for borrowers. An investment
      company pools funds from investors to inexpensively purchase and manage portfolios of stocks and bonds.
      These transactions differ from those of a dealer or broker. Brokers facilitate trades, and dealers stand ready to
      buy or sell from their own portfolios. Financial intermediaries, however, accept money from investors and may

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                  1.6 · Microeconomic and Macroeconomic Matters 23

create a completely different security all together. For example, if the borrower defaults on a mortgage loan
created by the commercial bank where you have your certificate of deposit, your investment is still safely
earning interest, and you are not directly affected.

Financial institutions usually facilitate financial intermediation. However, occasionally lenders and borrowers
are able to initiate transactions without the help of a financial intermediary. When this occurs on a large scale,
the process, known as disintermediation, can cause much turmoil in the financial markets. In the 1970s,
inflation rose above 10% on an annual basis, and yet commercial banks were limited to offering maximum
rates of 5% on their savings deposits.7 Savers bypassed banks and savings and loan associations to invest
directly into Treasury securities and other short-term marketable securities. This lack of deposit funds and the
subsequent behavior of the industry essentially eliminated the savings and loan industry and led to significant
deregulation of commercial and investment banking in the United States.

The advantages of a robust network of financial intermediaries are many. They add efficiency to the financial
system through lower transaction costs. They gather and disperse information to minimize financial abuse and
fraud. They provide economies of scale and specialized knowledge. Finally, financial intermediaries are critical
for the functioning of a capitalist economy.

 1.6 Microeconomic and Macroeconomic Matters

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Define microeconomics and macroeconomics.
  · Discuss the relationship between microeconomics and macroeconomics.
  · Explain the importance of macroeconomic variables in finance markets.

Microeconomics

In the business setting, finance is the intersection of economics and accounting. Financial decision makers rely
on economic theory and empirical evidence combined with accounting data to make informed decisions for
their organization. Economics is the study of the allocation of scarce resources. Economists attempt to
understand the how and why of human and financial capital allocation to governments, businesses, and
consumers.

We typically separate economics into two major areas, microeconomics and macroeconomics. Microeconomics
is devoted to the study of these decisions of allocation by individual businesses, persons, or organizations.
Microeconomics helps us understand incentives and behavior, consumer choices and consumption, and
supply and demand.

Our understanding of microeconomics aids in financial forecasting, planning, and budgeting by understanding
how individuals are likely to respond to changes in product or service functionality, price, supply, quality,
marketing, or other firm-induced stimulus. Empirical research by individuals, businesses, academics, and
government provide evidence of what is going on and suggest what may change or stay the same.

Macroeconomics

Whereas microeconomics studies the decisions of individuals, macroeconomics examines the decisions of
groups. Macroeconomic areas of study and concern include inflation, income, economic growth, and
unemployment. When Bacon Signs developed a financial and operating plan to expand the business, the firm
had to consider unemployment and inflation when estimating its price of labor and materials. Bacon Signs
also had to consider interest rates when estimating the cost of borrowing money to expand the business.

Macroeconomic modeling is limited because models cannot capture every variable in testing and application.

7 United States President and Council of Economic Advisers. "The 1970s: Inflation, High Interest Rates, and New Competition."
Economic Report of the President. 1991. https://fraser.stlouisfed.org/files/docs/publications/ERP/pages/6688_1990-1994.pdf
24 1 · Introduction to Finance

      However, financial forecasting must incorporate macroeconomic assumptions and expectations into individual
      firm and industry forecasts. Economic Foundations expands on our discussion of micro- and macroeconomics.

     Importance of Macroeconomic Variables in Financial Markets

      To make financial forecasts, managers need good information to understand the relationship among several
      economic variables. Working from small to large, sales forecasts estimate the likely price and quantity of
      goods sold. In doing so, the forecaster will consider local, regional, state, national, and international economic
      conditions. Inflation is an important macroeconomic variable that influences prices. Every quarter, financial
      information hubs, such as the Wall Street Journal (WSJ), and government agencies and regulatory bodies, such
      as the Treasury Department and the Federal Reserve, release estimates about expected and current inflation.
      This information informs policy makers how to adjust the money supply to meet target objectives. Financial
      forecasters pay close attention to current and expected interest rates, as they have a fundamental impact on
      the cost of raising money and determining the required rate of return for investment.

      The unemployment rate helps inform financial forecasters about the expected cost of labor and the ability of
      employers to hire people if a firm plans to increase the production of goods or services. The stock market is a
      forward-looking macroeconomic variable and measures investor expectations about future cash flows and
      economic growth. Political economic variables such as changes in regulation or tax policy can also affect
      forecasting models.

      LINK TO LEARNING

      Politics and Stock Markets

        Politics and stock market returns make for heated conversations. Who can run the country's economic
        system better, Republicans or Democrats? Presidents often take the credit or blame for overall economic
        performance even though their actual influence is less than you might think. See this fun comparison chart
        (https://openstax.org/r/macrotrends-net) of political economic performance that measures stock market
        returns by each administration going back to President Warren Harding in 1920. Who had the highest
        overall increase in the market? What president in the 21st century oversaw an overall decline in the market?
        Just to get things going, who had better overall market returns after four years in office, Donald Trump or
        Barack Obama?

      Each of the variables we have identified--inflation, interest rates, unemployment, economic growth, the stock
      market, and government fiscal policy--are macroeconomic factors. They are beyond the scope and influence
      of individual firms, but combined, they play a critical role in establishing the market in which firms compete. A
      better understanding of the interaction of these macro variables with each other and with individual micro or
      firm-specific variables can only strengthen financial forecasting and management decision-making.

      CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

      Here, There, and Everywhere: Where Did Your iPhone Come From?

        How do international macroeconomic factors affect investment decisions for businesses and individuals?
        Foreign investment adds risk and potential return to the decision-making process. Macroeconomic factors
        such as different inflation rates, unexpected changes in currency exchange rates, and mismatched
        economic growth all add to the uncertainty of making investments abroad. Just as important are
        government regulations limiting pollution, exploitation of precious minerals, labor laws, and tariffs. Toss in
        a pandemic, and a bottleneck or two, and suddenly international macroeconomic factors can affect almost
        every aspect of commerce and international trade.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                    1.7 · Financial Instruments 25

  For example, how far did your new iPhone travel before it got into your hands? Apple is an American
  company headquartered in Cupertino, California, and worth over $2 trillion.8 However, your phone may
  have visited as many as six continents before it reached you. Each location touched by the Apple corporate
  hand requires an understanding of the financial impact on the product cost and a comparison with
  alternative designs, resources, suppliers, manufacturers, and shippers. This is where finance can get really
  fun!

  (Sources: Magdalena Petrova. "We Traced What It Takes to Make an iPhone, from Its Initial Design to the
  Components and Raw Materials Needed to Make It a Reality." CNBC. December 14, 2018.
  https://www.cnbc.com/2018/12/13/inside-apple-iphone-where-parts-and-materials-come-from.html;
  Natasha Lomas. "Apple's Increasingly Tricky International Trade-offs." TechCrunch. January 6, 2019.
  https://techcrunch.com/2019/01/06/apples-increasingly-tricky-international-trade-offs/; Kif Leswing.
  "Here's Why Apple Is So Vulnerable to a Trade War with China." CNBC. May 13, 2019.
  https://www.cnbc.com/2019/05/13/why-is-apple-so-vulnerable-to-a-trade-war-with-china.html)

Relationship between Microeconomics and Macroeconomics

In the parable, a group of blind people happen upon an elephant for the first time, and they each touch one
part--but one part only--of the elephant. Subsequently, when they each describe what they have discovered,
the descriptions are vastly different. The group's members become upset, accusing one another of inaccurate
descriptions or worse. The parable demonstrates how individuals can make absolute truths from their own
limited and subjective information. Financial decision makers run a similar risk, if they choose to recognize
only their own findings and ignore other microeconomic or macroeconomic information and the interaction of
these factors.

A common view to understanding economics states that macroeconomics is a top-down approach and
microeconomics is a bottom-up approach. Financial decision makers need to see both the forest and the
individual trees to chart a course and move toward a strategic objective. They need both the macro data, so
important for strategic thinking, and the micro data, required for tactical movement. For example, the national
rate of unemployment may not have been much help when Bacon Signs was searching for skilled laborers
who could form neon signs. However, the unemployment rate helped inform the company about the
probability of demand for new businesses and the signs they would need.

 1.7 Financial Instruments

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Differentiate between money and capital markets.
  · List money market instruments.
  · List capital market instruments.

Money Markets and Instruments

The money market is the market for short-term, low-risk, highly liquid securities. "Short-term" refers to
money market securities having maturities of less than one year-sometimes as short as overnight. "Low
risk" specifically means that the probability of default by the issuer in very unlikely. Defaulting on money
market instruments is not unheard of, but it is very rare. "High liquidity" means that money market
instruments can generally be sold in a secondary market very quickly and at or near their current market
value. Finally, money market securities are homogeneous, meaning that within an issue of securities, a single

8 Sergei Klebnikov. "Apple Becomes First U.S. Company Worth More Than $2 Trillion." Forbes. August 19, 2020.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/sergeiklebnikov/2020/08/19/apple-becomes-first-us-company-worth-more-than-2-trillion/
26 1 · Introduction to Finance

      instrument is not unique. For example, if you purchase 13-week T-bills issued in the first week of January, each
      bill is identical to any other in the issue. Compare that to the purchase of physical assets such as a car or
      house, where each of the assets sold has some unique feature or measure of quality.

      Financial institutions, corporations, and governments that have short-term borrowing and/or lending needs
      issue securities in the money market. Most of the transactions are quite large, with typical amounts in excess
      of $100,000. These large transactions are the norm when trading federal funds, repurchase agreements,
      commercial paper, or negotiable certificates of deposit. Our sample company, Bacon Signs, was much too
      small to participate directly in the money market. However, Bacon Signs' borrowing rates were affected by
      changes in the money market. Treasury bills are also a very important component of the money market, and
      they trade in smaller amounts starting at $10,000 per T-bill.

      Treasury bills (T-bills), are short-term debt instruments issued by the federal government. T-bills are
      auctioned weekly by the Treasury Department through the trading window of the Federal Reserve Bank of
      New York. The federal government uses T-bills to meet short-term liquidity needs. T-bills have very short
      maturities and a broad secondary market and are default-risk free. T-bills are also exempt from state and local
      income taxes. As a result, they carry some of the lowest effective interest rates on publicly traded debt
      securities. In addition to the regular auction of new T-bills, there is also an active secondary market where
      investors can trade used or previously issued T-bills. Since 2001, the average daily trading volume for T-bills
      has exceeded $75 billion.9

      Commercial paper (CP) is a short-term, unsecured debt security issued by corporations and financial
      institutions to meet short-term financing needs such as for inventory and receivables. For example, credit card
      companies use commercial paper to finance credit card payments. Commercial paper has a maturity of one to
      270 days. The short maturity reduces SEC oversight. The lesser oversight and the unsecured nature of CP
      means that only highly rated firms are able to issue the uninsured paper. The default rate on commercial
      paper is typically low, but default rates did increase into the double-digit range during the financial crisis of
      2008.

      Commercial paper typically carries a minimum face value of $100,000 and sells at a discount with the face
      value as the repayment amount. Corporations and financial institutions, not the government, issue
      commercial paper; thus, returns are taxable. Further, unlike T-bills, there is not a robust secondary market for
      CP. Most purchasers are large, such as mutual fund investment companies, and they tend to hold commercial
      paper until maturity.

      Negotiable certificates of deposit (NCDs) are very large CDs issued by financial institutions. They are
      redeemable only at maturity, but they can and often do trade prior to maturity in a broad secondary market.
     NCDs, or jumbo CDs, are so called because they sell in increments of $100,000 or more. However, typical
      minimums amounts are $1,000,000 with a maturity of two weeks to six months.

      NCDs differ in some important ways from the typical CD you may be familiar with from your local bank or
      credit union. The typical CD has a maturity date, interest rate, and face amount and is protected by deposit
      insurance. However, if an investor wishes to cash out prior to maturity, they will incur a substantial penalty
      from the issuer (bank or credit union). An NCD also has a maturity date and amount but is much larger than a
      regular CD and appeals to institutional investors. The principal is not insured. When the investor wishes to
      cash out early, there is a robust secondary market for trading the NCD. The issuing institution can offer higher
      rates on NCDs compared to CDs because they know they will have use of the purchase amount for the entire
      maturity of the NCD. The reserve requirements on NCDs by the Federal Reserve are also lower than for other
      types of deposits.

      The market for federal funds is notable because the Federal Reserve targets the equilibrium interest rate on

       9 Henrik Bessembinder, Chester Spatt, and Kumar Venkataraman. "A Survey of the Microstructure of Fixed-Income Markets."
       Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis. February 2020. https://www.sec.gov/spotlight/fixed-income-advisory-committee/
       survey-of-microstructure-of-fixed-income-market.pdf

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                    1.7 · Financial Instruments 27

federal funds as one of its most important monetary policy tools. The federal funds market traditionally
consists of the overnight borrowing and lending of immediately available funds among depository financial
institutions, notably domestic commercial banks. The participants in the market negotiate the federal funds
interest rate. However, the Federal Reserve effectively sets the target interest rate range in the federal funds
market by controlling the supply of funds available for use in the market. Many of the borrowing and lending
rates in our economy are a direct function of the federal funds rate.

Capital Markets and Instruments

The capital market is the market for longer-term financial instruments. The capital market is similar to the
money market. However, maturities are longer, default risk varies to a greater degree from low to high, and
liquidity is less certain, as is the homogeneity of the financial instruments. Broadly, we separate capital market
instruments into debt instruments traded in the bond markets and equity securities traded on the stock
markets.

The federal government issues Treasury notes and bonds to raise money for current spending and to repay
past borrowing. The size of the Treasury market is quite large, as the US federal government over the years
has accumulated a total indebtedness of over $28 trillion.10

Treasury notes are US government debt instruments with maturities of 2 to 10 years. The Treasury auctions
notes on a regular basis, and investors may purchase new notes from TreasuryDirect.gov in the same way they
would a T-bill. T-notes differ from T-bills in that they are longer term, pay semiannual coupon interest
payments, and pay the par or face value of the note at maturity. Upon issue of a note, the size, number, and
timing of note payments is fixed. However, prices do change in the secondary market as interest rates change.
Like T-bills, T-notes are generally exempt from state and local taxes. There is an active secondary market for
Treasury notes.

Longer-term Treasury issues, Treasury bonds, have maturities of 20 or 30 years. T-bonds are like T-notes in
that they pay semiannual coupon interest payments for the life of the security and pay the face value at
maturity. They are longer term than notes and typically have higher coupon rates.

State and local governments and taxing districts can issue debt in the form of municipal bonds ("munis").
Local borrowing carries more risk than Treasury securities, and default or bankruptcy is unlikely but possible.
Thus, munis have ratings that run a spectrum similar to that of corporate bonds in that they receive a bond
rating based on the perceived default risk. The defining feature of municipal bonds is that some interest
payments are tax-free. Interest on munis is always exempt from federal taxes and sometimes exempt from
state and local taxes. This makes them very attractive to investors in high income brackets.

Just as governments borrow money in the long-term from investors, so do corporations. A corporation often
issues bonds for longer-term financing. Bond contracts identify very specific terms of agreement and outline
the rules for the order, timing, and amount of contractual payments, as well as processes for when one or
more of the required activities lapse. A bond contract, known as an indenture, includes both standard
"boilerplate" contract language and specific conditions unique to a particular issue. Because of these non-
standardized features of a bond contract, the secondary market for trading used bonds typically requires a
broker, dealer, or investment company to facilitate a trade.

An important goal of business executives is to maximize the owners' wealth. For corporations, shares of stock
represent ownership. Stocks are difficult to price compared to bonds. Bonds have contracts that specify the
number and amount of all payments made by the firm to the purchasers of bonds. Stock cash flows are far
more uncertain than bond cash flows. Stocks might or might not have periodic dividend payments, and an
investor can plan to sell the stock at some point in the future. However, no contract guarantees the size of the
dividends or the time or resale price of the stock. Thus, the cash flows from stock ownership are more

10 Trading Economics. "United States Government Debt." Trading Economics. https://tradingeconomics.com/united-states/
government-debt
28 1 · Introduction to Finance

uncertain and risky than cash flows from bonds.

Ownership of corporations is easily transferable if a company's stock trades in one of the organized stock
exchanges or in the over-the-counter (OTC) market. Most of the trading consists of used or previously issued
stocks in the over-the-counter market and organized exchanges. The two largest stock exchanges in the world
are the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) and the NASDAQ. Both exchanges are located in the United States.

 1.8 Concepts of Time and Value

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Explain the impact of time on saving and spending.
  · Describe economic value.

Many students don't have a choice between saving and spending. College is expensive, and it is easy to spend
every dollar you earn and to borrow to meet the rest of your obligations. Businesses, however, continually
make decisions about when and how much money to borrow or invest. Bacon Signs established banking
relationships to borrow money when needed to expand the business or a product line. Sometimes the best
decision is to invest as soon as possible to grab opportunities, and other times it is better to delay new
investment in order to pay dividends to the owners of the company.

LINK TO LEARNING

The Dow Jones Industrial Average Marches On!

Once you begin to save and invest, here is a "fun fact" about the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA)
(https://openstax.org/r/investopedia-djia), also known as the Dow 30. It first appeared on May 26, 1896, as
a quick way for stock traders to assess if the stock market had gone "up or down" each day and by how
much. Here we are over 100 years later, and the Dow 30 index is alive and well. Of course, the 30 companies
have changed, but the index does represent a continuous yardstick to measure stock performance over
time. As Table 1.1 shows, it took from 1906 to 1972, or a little over 66 years, for the Dow 30 to increase
tenfold, from a value of 100 to a value of 1,000. The next tenfold increase from 1,000 to 10,000 took only a
little under 27 years from 1972 to 1999. Time will tell if or when the Dow 30 will top 100,000 at the closing
bell.

                                Closing Milestones Date

                                41            5/26/1896

                                100           1/12/1906

                                1,000         11/14/1972

                                10,000        3/29/1999

                                20,000        1/25/2017

                                30,000        11/24/2020

                                Table 1.1 The Dow 30 Closing
                                Milestones and Dates

Impact of Time on Saving and Spending

The choice to spend or save and invest is really a choice between consumption today versus consumption in

Access for free at openstax.org
                                     1.8 · Concepts of Time and Value 29

the future. Economists, investment advisers, your friends, and mine love to discuss the trade-off of
consumption now or later--even if not in those words. We have all heard conversations that go something like
this: "Let's go grab a beer--you can study for tomorrow's exam in the morning." Or "My father's investment
adviser told me that if I invest $500 per month for the next 30 years and earn an annual rate of 10% on my
investments, I will have invested $180,000 over time but accumulated an investment portfolio worth over $1.13
million!"

An important aspect of the trade-off between saving and spending involves your short-, intermediate-, and
long-term goals. Delaying consumption until later comes with risks. Will your consumption choices still be
available? Will the prices be attainable? Will you still be able to consume and enjoy your future purchases?

When saving for short-term objectives, the safety of the principal invested is important, and the value of
compounding returns is minimal compared to longer-term investments. Most short-term investors have a low
tolerance for risk and hope to beat the rate of inflation with a little extra besides. An example could be to start
a holiday savings account at your local bank as a way to save, earn a small rate of return, and assure that you
have funds set aside for consumption at the end of the year.

An intermediate investment may be to save for a new car or for the down payment on a house or vacation
home. Again, maintaining the principal is important, but you have some time to recover from poor investment
returns. Intermediate-term investments tend to earn higher average annual rates of return than short-term
investments, but they also have greater uncertainty and risk.

Long-term investments have the advantage of enough time to recover from temporary poor performance and
the luxury of compounded returns over a long period. Further, long-term investments tend to have greater
risk and higher expected average annual rates of return. Even though this is a business finance text,
sometimes a personal finance example is easier to relate to. To illustrate, Table 1.2 demonstrates four different
investment scenarios. In scenario 1, you invest $5,000 annually from ages 26 through 60 into an account
earning an average annual rate of return of 10% per year. Over your lifetime, you invest a total of $175,000,
and at age 60, you have an estimated portfolio value of $1,490,634. This is a healthy amount that has almost
certainly beaten the average annual rate of inflation. In scenario 1, by investing regularly, you accumulate
roughly 8.5 times the value of what you invested. Congratulations, you can expect to become a millionaire!

Compare your results in scenario 1 with your college roommate in scenario 2, who is able to invest $5,000 per
year from ages 19 through 25 and leave her investments until age 60 in an account that continues to earn an
annual rate of 10%. She makes her investments earlier than yours, but they total only $35,000. However,
despite a much smaller investment, her head start advantage and the high average annual compounded rate
of return leave her with an expected portfolio value of $1,466,369. Her total is almost as great as the amount
you would accumulate, but with a much smaller total investment.

Scenarios 3 and 4 are even more dramatic, as can be seen from a review of Table 1.2. In both scenarios, only
five $5,000 investments are made, but they are made earlier in the investor's life. Parents or grandparents
could make these investments on behalf of the recipients. In both scenarios, the portfolios grow to amounts
greater than those of you or your roommate with smaller total investments. The common factor is that greater
time leads to additional compounding of the investments and thus greater future values.

                         Average Annual Rate of Return = 10%

        Assumptions      Scenario 1 Scenario 2 Scenario 3 Scenario 4
Starting investment age
Ending investment age    26  19  14                                     9
Total investments
                         60  25  18                                     13

                         35  7   5                                      5

Table 1.2 Four Investment Scenarios: Assumptions and Expected Outcomes
30 1 · Introduction to Finance

                                             Average Annual Rate of Return = 10%

                                Assumptions  Scenario 1 Scenario 2 Scenario 3 Scenario 4

Annual investment                            $5,000 $5,000 $5,000 $5,000

Total investment amount $175,000 $35,000 $25,000 $25,000

Value at age 60                              $1,490,634 $1,466,369 $1,838,858 $2,961,500

Table 1.2 Four Investment Scenarios: Assumptions and Expected Outcomes

Definition of Economic Value

Value is a term used frequently in business and especially in economics, accounting, and finance. Accountants
track, record, and display value in the form of financial statements and footnotes. The numbers they present
are "book values" and represent what has occurred. Financial people like to speak in terms of "market values."
Market values are calculated using expected future cash flows discounted to today. Market values are the
prices that consumers pay for a product. Economic value is what we believe consumers are actually willing to
pay for a product, service, or experience. For example, the price of a movie ticket may be $10, but there are
individuals who are willing to pay far more for the experience of watching a movie on the big screen.

Generally, the economic value is at least as great as the market value or current price of an asset. When Bacon
Signs planned for the future, the firm attempted to determine the economic value of its products when
creating an optimal mix of price and quantity sold. Firms that produce unique products for clients may have
multiple prices based on the estimated economic value of their good or service to the client. One way to think
about the difference between market value and economic value is that market value is what you have to pay,
while economic value is what you are willing to pay.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                  1 · Summary 31

     Summary

1.1 What Is Finance?

Finance is the study of the trade-off between risk and expected return. There are three broad areas of finance:
business finance, investments, and financial markets and institutions.

1.2 The Role of Finance in an Organization

The accounting department creates financial statements, and the finance department implements the firm's
policy objectives, monitors results, and responds to necessary strategic and tactical changes. Finance is
responsible for budgeting and forecasting. Finance aids in establishing firm objectives and is responsible for
meeting with creditors, lenders, owners, regulators, and other stakeholders that provide capital to the firm or
have a claim against firm assets.

1.3 Importance of Data and Technology

Much of the data used in business today has been available for many years. However, data today is more
attainable than ever due to technological advancements facilitating a user's ability to gather, evaluate, and
store information faster and more cost effectively than ever. Information is continually available, so the
quicker and less expensively firms can adjust to the arrival of new information, the more valuable they become
for their stakeholders.

1.4 Careers in Finance

Careers in finance are plentiful, fulfilling, and well compensated. Introductory positions are available in areas
such as data collection and data entry. More skill and experience is required for roles such as data analysis and
forecasting. Eventually, executive-level positions such as CFO present themselves to the most qualified.
Finance careers are not limited to financial firms, as understanding finance is an important skill in government
regulatory positions, nonprofit management, and all types of commercial business--from real estate, to retail,
to manufacturing, to education.

1.5 Markets and Participants

Financial markets are where buyers and sellers of financial securities come together to trade. The trading of
securities allows markets to value assets and signal value as new information arrives. Brokers operate to bring
buyers and sellers together and receive commissions. Dealers trade from their own portfolios and are often
willing to make markets for specific securities by agreeing to buy or sell at the current bid and ask prices.
Financial intermediaries actually change or create new financial products.

1.6 Microeconomic and Macroeconomic Matters

Economics is the study of the allocation of scarce resources. Economists attempt to understand the how and
why of human, physical, and financial capital allocation. Microeconomics is the study of factors affecting an
individual's consumption, and macroeconomics is the study of all the aggregate factors affecting an economy.
Economics is important in finance due to the number of economic variables critical to good financial
forecasting.

1.7 Financial Instruments

Maturity is one method to differentiate among financial instruments. Using this methodology, we have money
markets and capital markets. Money markets consist of short-term marketable securities, and capital markets
focus on longer-term securities such as bonds and stocks.

1.8 Concepts of Time and Value

The concepts of time and value involve the resolution of conflict between consumption now versus
consumption later. Time and value represent the trade-off between risk and expected return. Many financial
32 1 · Key Terms

exercises examine the relationships among time, interest rates, risk, cash flows now, and cash flows in the
future. You can expect to solve several "time value of money" problems before you complete this book.

     Key Terms

brokers individuals or a firm that brings together potential buyers and sellers of a product and receives a
    commission at transaction

business finance the study and application of how managers can apply financial principles to maximize the
    value of a firm in a risky environment

capital budgeting the process of determining which long-term or fixed assets to acquire in an effort to
    maximize shareholder value

capital market market for longer-term financial instruments, such as stocks and bonds, used to finance
    long-term projects for organizations

capital structure the mix of financing, usually debt and equity, used by a firm
chief financial officer (CFO) an executive-level officer who sets policy for working capital management,

    determines optimal capital structure for the firm, and makes the final decision in matters of capital
    budgeting
commercial paper (CP) short-term, unsecured financial obligations issued by firms as a means of short-term
    financing for items such as inventory or payables
comptroller also referred to as controller, individual in charge of financial reporting and the oversight of the
    accounting activities necessary to develop financial reports
dealers facilitate a market and the trading of securities by holding a portfolio of the underlying asset for easy
    purchase and sale; earn money on the spread between ask and bid prices for the asset
default risk the risk that the issuer of a financial security will be unable to make payments as specified in the
    terms of a financial contract
diversifiable risk also called unsystematic risk, a risk that can be eliminated without the loss of expected
    return by holding a portfolio of securities
economic value the amount a consumer is willing to pay for a particular asset or service, usually greater
    than or equal to the current market price or present value of the asset
federal funds rate the rate targeted by the Federal Reserve in the implementation of monetary policy
financial industry regulatory authority (FINRA) an independent, nongovernmental organization that
    writes and enforces the rules governing registered brokers and broker-dealer firms in the United States
financial intermediary a commercial bank or a mutual fund investment company that serves as an
    intermediary to enable easier and more efficient exchanges among transacting parties, often accepting one
    form of financial asset from which they create another, such as taking demand deposits to create mortgage
    loans
financial markets and institutions one of the three main areas of the field of finance; firms and regulatory
    agencies that oversee our financial system
inflation risk the risk of reduced purchasing power of goods and services due to rising prices
investments one of the three main areas of finance; products and processes used to create individual and
    institutional portfolios with the intent of growing wealth
money market the market for short-term, low-risk, highly liquid, homogeneous financial securities; common
    money market securities include T-bills, NCDs, and commercial paper
money market mutual funds created by investment companies to pool the money of many investors to
    purchase and then manage short-term, low-risk, liquid financial portfolios of securities
municipal bonds (munis) long-term debt obligations issued by state or local governments that often have
    important tax advantages relative to corporate bonds
negotiable certificate of deposit very large CDs issued by financial institutions, redeemable only at maturity
   but can and often do trade prior to maturity in a broad secondary market; also called jumbo CDs because
    they sell in increments of $100,000 or more

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         1 · Multiple Choice 33

non-diversifiable risk risk that cannot be eliminated by simply holding a portfolio of securities; also known
    as systematic risk

political risk the risk of local, state, or national governments "changing the rules" and disrupting firm cash
    flows

primary market a term used in financial markets to identify the market for the purchase and sale of new
    securities

secondary market a term used in financial markets to represent the purchase or sale of used securities that
    trade after the initial sale by the offering firm

Securities Investor Protection Corporation (SIPC) a nonprofit corporation that provides brokerage
    customers up to $500,000 coverage for cash and securities held by the firm

treasurer position responsible for monitoring cash flow at a firm and frequently is the contact person for
    bankers, underwriters, and other outside sources of financing

Treasury bills (T-bills) short-term debt obligations of one year or less issued by the US government
Treasury bonds long-term debt obligations issued by the US government characterized by having maturities

    of greater than 10 years and making periodic interest payments as well as principal payment at maturity
Treasury notes long-term debt obligations issued by the US government characterized by having maturities

    of 2 to 10 years and making periodic interest payment as well as principal payment at maturity
working capital management the development, oversight, and management of a firm's short-term assets

    and liabilities

     Multiple Choice

 1. Which of the following was NOT identified by your authors as one of the three main areas of financial
     study?
      a. business finance
      b. capital budgeting
       c. investments
      d. financial markets and institutions

 2. What is the process of determining which long-term or fixed assets to acquire in an effort to maximize
     shareholder value?
      a. Business finance
      b. Capital budgeting
       c. Investments
      d. Financial markets and institutions

 3. In an organization with each of these financial positions, which title is most likely to be associated with a
     job description that is less of a "hands-on" manager and that engages more in visionary and strategic
     planning?
      a. comptroller (or controller)
      b. treasurer
       c. vice president of finance
      d. chief financial officer (CFO)

 4. Which of the following statements is false?
      a. Financial planning is an important tool of for-profit organizations such as corporations and
           partnerships but is not important for not-for-profit enterprises such charitable organizations or
           governments.
      b. Good financial planning considers past, present, and pro forma income statements.
       c. Balance sheets are critical elements of the financial planning process and help demonstrate expected
34 1 · Multiple Choice

           sources and uses of funds.
      d. Forecasting in the form of expected sales, cost of funds, and micro- and macroeconomic conditions

           are essential elements of financial planning.

 5. Which of the following statements regarding data is generally NOT true?
      a. Financial data is important for internal and external analysis of business firms.
      b. Outsiders use publicly available data about firms to make investment and regulatory decisions.
       c. "Gut feelings" decision-making tends to be more consistent with value maximization.
      d. Suppliers need financial information to determine if they should supply trade credit, and customers
           need to know if a firm's products are reliable and appropriately priced.

 6. Which of the following is generally NOT true about cloud data storage versus on-site data storage?
      a. Cloud data storage provides storage cost advantages.
      b. Cloud data storage causes increased energy consumption.
       c. Cloud data storage comes with specialized data protection services.
      d. Cloud data storage comes with specialized maintenance services.

 7. Which of the following describes United States Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) expectations of jobs using
     financial skills in the next decade?
      a. plentiful but low paying
      b. few and low paying
       c. plentiful and high paying
      d. few and high paying

 8. Which of the following organizations would be unlikely to hire a financial analyst?
      a. Government agencies may hire financial analysts to aid in regulatory oversight and enforcement.
      b. Investment companies may hire financial analysts to produce financial reports.
       c. Corporations may hire financial analysts to develop financial forecasts.
      d. All of the above organizations are likely to hire and develop financial analysts.

 9. The _______________ market is the market for _______________ securities, and the _______________ is the market for
     _______________ securities.
      a. primary; used; secondary; new
      b. primary; new; secondary; used
       c. secondary; new; primary; new
      d. secondary; used; primary; used

10. _______________ own the securities that they buy or sell; when they engage in a financial transaction, they are
      trading from their own portfolio.
       a. Dealers
      b. Brokers
       c. Advisers
      d. Comptrollers

11. _______________ act as facilitators in a market, and they bring together buyers and sellers for a transaction.
       a. Dealers
      b. Brokers
       c. Advisers
      d. Comptrollers

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         1 · Multiple Choice 35

12. _______________ is the study of the allocation of scarce resources, _______________ is devoted to the study of
      these decisions of allocation by small or individual entities, and _______________ examines decisions taken
      together or in the aggregate.
       a. Macroeconomics; microeconomics; economics
      b. Microeconomics; economics; macroeconomics
       c. Economics; microeconomics; macroeconomics
      d. Economics; macroeconomics; microeconomics

13. Which of the following is NOT an economy-wide macroeconomic variable used in macro-forecasting
      models?
       a. inflation
      b. unemployment
       c. economic growth
      d. CEO turnover

14. _______________ is the market for short-term, low-risk, highly liquid, homogeneous securities.
       a. The capital market
      b. The financial market
       c. The stock market
      d. The money market

15. _______________ are short-term debt instruments issued by the federal government.
       a. Treasury bills
      b. Treasury notes
       c. Treasury bonds
      d. Federal Reserve notes

16. _______________ is a short-term, unsecured security issued by corporations and financial institutions to meet
      short-term financing needs such as inventory and receivables.
       a. A Treasury bill
      b. Commercial paper
       c. A negotiable certificate of deposit
      d. A Treasury note

17. _______________ are US government debt instruments with maturities of 2, 3, 5, 7, or 10 years.
       a. Federal funds
      b. Federal Reserve notes
       c. Treasury notes
      d. Treasury bonds

18. _______________ investments tend to have _______________ risk and _______________ expected returns.
       a. Long-term; less; smaller
      b. Long-term; greater; greater
       c. Short-term; greater; smaller
      d. Short-term; less; greater

19. _______________ value is what a consumer pays for a product. _______________ value is what a consumer is
      willing to pay for a product.
       a. Market; Economic
      b. Economic; Market
36 1 · Review Questions

       c. Book; Market
      d. Economic; Book

     Review Questions

 1. Identify and briefly define the three areas of study in finance.
 2. Identify the three focal areas in business finance.
 3. Define each of the following types of risk:

          · inflation risk
          · diversifiable risk
          · non-diversifiable risk
          · political risk

 4. Identify three common components of good financial planning.
 5. The Concepts in Practice feature in Section 1.3 discusses the importance of data for decision-making. List

     at least three of the ways the article suggests managers can use financial statements.
 6. Describe the role of a financial analyst in a financial institution such as a bank or investment company.
 7. Is a dealer or a broker more likely to be a market maker? In your answer, define the activities of a market

     maker.
 8. How can an understanding of micro- and macroeconomic factors aid in small business decision-making?
 9. We measure market capitalization by multiplying the number of shares of stock outstanding by the

     current price per share. Go to finance.yahoo.com and determine the market capitalization of Nike, Tesla,
     and Walmart. Which company has the greatest market capitalization? Which company has the highest
     level of sales? If these are not the same companies, why do you think the company with the lower sales
     level has greater market capitalization?

     Video Activity

Why Climate Change Means New Risk for US Financial Markets
Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/player-pbs)
 1. Cite some examples that the video used to demonstrate the effect of climate change on the value of

     property and businesses. Now, identify examples of environmental disasters that you are personally
     familiar with. How have businesses in your community adapted in response to climate change?
 2. Do you agree or disagree with the following statement: "The young people of today are the investors of
     tomorrow, and they will prioritize environmental impact in their investment choices." How do you think
     your investing future will be altered by climate change? Do you agree that environmental changes are a
     legitimate and measurable investment risk?
Markets and Participants
Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/robinhood)
Robinhood is a mobile trading platform for stocks, bonds, and options. The company has transformed the
security trading industry by introducing commission-free trades and simplifying the trading process with its
intuitive mobile app. However, as this Wall Street Journal video about Robinhood explains, the company and its
products are not without controversy.
 3. Have you ever traded financial securities? If so, which trading platform(s) have you used? If you have

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          1 · Video Activity 37

    traded using another platform, how does your trading experience compare to that described in the video?
    If you have not traded securities, discuss how the Robinhood app affects your willingness to try trading.
4. At the end of the video, one interviewee viewed Robinhood as a gateway trading platform, but not a
    platform for serious traders. The other saw Robinhood as a means to level the playing field for all
    interested investors. What are your thoughts on the Robinhood trading app? Do you agree that option
    trading should be more restricted than the video implies?
38 1 · Video Activity
Access for free at openstax.org
2 · Why It Matters                                                                                                                   39

 2
              Corporate Structure and Governance

Figure 2.1 The legal structure of any business will have a substantial impact on its operations. (credit: modification of work "New
Board Room at 2 Broadway" by Metropolitan Transportation Authority/Patrick Cashin/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline

  2.1 Business Structures
  2.2 Relationship between Shareholders and Company Management
  2.3 Role of the Board of Directors
  2.4 Agency Issues: Shareholders and Corporate Boards
  2.5 Interacting with Investors, Intermediaries, and Other Market Participants
  2.6 Companies in Domestic and Global Markets

      Why It Matters

When someone opens a business, it is because they want to fulfill important personal financial goals. In
publicly traded companies, managers and employees work on behalf of the shareholders, who own the
business through their ownership of company stock. These managers and employees have an ongoing
obligation to pursue projects, policies, and corporate investments that will increase or promote stockholder
value over the long term. Although many companies focus on financially related goals, such as growth,
earnings per share, and market share, the main financial goal is to create value for investors.

Keep in mind that a company's stockholders are not just an abstract group. Like the sole business owner, they
are individuals who have chosen to invest their hard-earned cash in a company. They are looking for a return
on their investment in order to meet their own personal long-term financial goals, which might be saving for
retirement, a new home, or college education for their children.

In addition to increasing value, it is also important to realize that a firm has important nonfinancial goals.
Some examples of these might include the following:

  · Expanding sales to existing customers
  · Increasing customer loyalty to the weaker brands
  · Developing new products for current and potential customers
  · Becoming international by setting up an online ordering service
40 2 · Corporate Structure and Governance

        · Improving customer satisfaction with customer services

      If managers are to help stockholders maximize their wealth, they must know how that wealth is determined in
      the first place. One of the main concepts in finance is that the value of any asset is determined by the present
      value of the stream of cash flows that the asset will provide to its owners over the course of time. In
      subsequent chapters, we will also be covering stock valuation in depth, and we will see that stock prices are
      based on cash flows expected in future years, not only on those coming in at the present time.

      For these reasons, stock price maximization, which leads directly to maximizing shareholder wealth, requires
      us to take a long-term view of company operations. It is also important to realize that managerial actions that
      affect a company's value may not immediately be reflected in the price of a company's stock but rather will
      become evident in the long-term prospects of the organization.

      In the case of privately held companies, smaller firms, and sole proprietorships, there are no shareholders.
      However, attention to long-term growth and maximizing the value of a firm is just as important a goal to the
      owners, who are also usually senior management with the company.

     2.1 Business Structures

     Learning Outcomes

      By the end of this section, you will be able to:
        · Identify the business form created by most organizations.
        · Contrast the advantages and disadvantages that the corporate form has over sole proprietorships.
        · Contrast the advantages and disadvantages that the corporate form has over partnerships.
        · List and describe characteristics associated with a hybrid business structure.

     The Most Common Types of Business Organization

      The functions of most executive management teams are very similar for most businesses, and they will not
      differ in any significant manner based on how they may be structured or organized. However, the legal
      structure of any company will have a substantial impact on its operations, and it therefore deserves a
      significant amount of analysis and discussion. The four most common forms of business organizations are the
      following:

      1. Sole proprietorships
      2. Partnerships
      3. Corporations
      4. Hybrids, such as limited liability companies (LLCs) and limited liability partnerships (LLPs)

      The vast majority of businesses take the form of a proprietorship. However, based on the total dollar value of
      combined sales, more than 80 percent of all business in the United States is conducted by a corporation.1
      Because corporations engage in the most business, and because most successful businesses eventually
      convert into corporations, we will focus on corporations in this chapter. However, it is still important to
      understand the legal differences between different types of firms and their advantages and disadvantages.

     Sole Proprietorships

      A proprietorship is typically defined as an unincorporated business owned by a single person. The process of
      forming a business as a sole proprietor is usually a simple matter. A business owner merely decides to begin
      conducting business operations, and that person is immediately off and running. Compared to other forms of
      business organizations, proprietorships have the following four important advantages:

      1. They have a basic structure and are simple and inexpensive to form.

       1 Aaron Krupkin and Adam Looney. "9 Facts about Pass-Through Businesses." Brookings. The Brookings Institution, May 15, 2017.
       https://www.brookings.edu/research/9-facts-about-pass-through-businesses

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                        2.1 · Business Structures 41

2. They are subject to relatively few government rules and regulations.
3. Taxation on sole proprietorships is far simpler than on other organizational forms. There are no separate

      taxes associated with a sole proprietorship, as there are with corporations. Sole proprietors simply report
      all their business income and losses on their personal income tax returns.
4. Controlling responsibilities of the firm are not divided in any way. This results in less complicated
      managerial decisions and improved timeliness of necessary corrective actions.

However, despite the ease of their formation and these stated advantages, proprietorships have four notable
shortcomings:

1. A sole proprietor has unlimited personal liability for any financial obligations or business debts, so in the
      end, they risk incurring greater financial losses than the total amount of money they originally invested in
      the company's formation. As an example, a sole proprietor might begin with an initial investment of
      $5,000 to start their business. Now, let's say a customer slips on some snow-covered stairs while entering
      this business establishment and sues the company for $500,000. If the organization loses the lawsuit, the
      sole proprietor would be responsible for the entire $500,000 settlement (less any liability insurance
      coverage the business might have).

2. Unlike with a corporation, the life of the business is limited to the life of the individual who created it. Also,
      if the sole proprietor brings in any new equity or financing, the additional investor(s) might demand a
      change in the organizational structure of the business.

3. Because of these first two points, sole proprietors will typically find it difficult to obtain large amounts of
      financing. For these reasons, the vast majority of sole proprietorships in the United States are small
      businesses.

4. A sole proprietor may lack specific expertise or experience in important business disciplines, such as
      finance, accounting, taxation, or organizational management. This could result in additional costs
      associated with periodic consulting with experts to assist in these various business areas.

It is often the case that businesses that were originally formed as proprietorships are later converted into
corporations when growth of the business causes the disadvantages of the sole proprietorship structure to
outweigh the advantages.

Partnerships

A partnership is a business structure that involves a legal arrangement between two or more people who
decide to do business as an organization together. In some ways, partnerships are similar to sole
proprietorships in that they can be established fairly easily and without a large initial investment or cost.

Partnerships offer some important advantages over sole proprietorships. Among them, two or more partners
may have different or higher levels of business expertise than a single sole proprietor, which can lead to
superior management of a business. Further, additional partners can bring greater levels of investment capital
to a firm, making the process of initial business formation smoother and less risky.

A partnership also has certain tax advantages in that the firm's income is allocated on a pro rata basis to the
partners. This income is then taxed on an individual basis, allowing the company to avoid corporate income
tax. However, similar to the sole proprietorship, all of the partners are subject to unlimited personal liability,
which means that if a partnership becomes bankrupt and any partner is unable to meet their pro rata share of
the firm's liabilities, the remaining partners will be responsible for paying the unsatisfied claims.

For this reason, the actions of a single partner that might cause a company to fail could end up bringing
potential ruin to other partners who had nothing at all to do with the actions that led to the downfall of the
company. Also, as with most sole proprietorships, unlimited liability makes it difficult for most partnerships to
raise large amounts of capital.
42 2 · Corporate Structure and Governance

     Corporations

      The most common type of organizational structure for larger businesses is the corporation. A corporation is a
      legal business entity that is created under the laws of a state. This entity operates separately and distinctly
      from its owners and managers. It is the separation of the corporate entity from its owners and managers that
      limits stockholders' losses to the amount they originally invest in the firm. In other words, a corporation can
      lose all of its money and go bankrupt, but its owners will only lose the funds that they originally invested in the
      company.

      Unlike other forms of organization, corporations have unlimited lives as business entities. It is far easier to
      transfer shares of stock in a corporation than it is to transfer one's interest in an unincorporated business.
      These factors make it much easier for corporations to raise the capital necessary to operate large businesses.
      Many companies, such as Microsoft and Hewlett-Packard, originally began as proprietorships or partnerships,
      but at some point, they found it more advantageous to adopt a corporate form of organization as they grew in
      size and complexity.

      An important disadvantage to corporations is income taxes. The earnings of most corporations in the United
      States are subject to something referred to as double taxation. First, the corporation's earnings are taxed;
      then, when its after-tax earnings are paid out as dividend income to shareholders (stockholders), those
      earnings are taxed again as personal income.

      It is important to note that after recognizing this problem of double taxation, Congress created the S
      corporation, designed to aid small businesses in this area. S corporations are taxed as if they were
      proprietorships or partnerships and are exempt from corporate income tax. In order to qualify for S
      corporation status, a company can have no more than 100 stockholders. Thus, this corporate form is useful for
      relatively small, privately owned firms but precludes larger, more diverse organizations. A larger corporation is
      often referred to as a C corporation. The vast majority of small corporations prefer to elect S status. This
      structure will usually suit them very well until the business reaches a point where their financing needs grow
      and they make the decision to raise funds by offering their stock to the public. At such time, they will usually
      become C corporations. Generally speaking, an S corporation structure is more popular with smaller
      businesses because of the likely tax savings, and a C corporation structure is more prevalent among larger
      companies due to the greater flexibility in raising capital.

     Hybrids: Limited Liability Corporations and Partnerships

      Another form of business organization is the limited liability corporation (LLC). This type of business
      structure has become a very popular type of organization. The LLC is essentially a hybrid form of business
      that has elements of both a corporation and a partnership. Another form of organizational structure is
      something called a limited liability partnership (LLP), which is quite similar to the LLC in structure and in
      use. It is very common to see LLPs used as the organizational form for professional services firms, often in
      such fields as accounting, architecture, and law. Conversely, LLCs are typically used by other forms of
      businesses.

      Similar to corporation structures, LLCs and LLPs will provide their principals with a certain amount of liability
      protection, but they are taxed as partnerships. Also, unlike in limited partnerships, where a senior general
      partner will have overall control of the business, investors in an LLC or LLP have votes that are in direct
      proportion to their percentage of ownership interest or the relative amount of their original investment.

      A particular advantage of a limited liability partnership is that it allows some of the partners in a firm to limit
      their liability. Under such a structure, only designated partners have unlimited liability for company debts;
      other partners can be designated as limited partners, only liable up to the amount of their initial contribution.
      Limited partners are typically not active decision makers within the firm.

      Some important differences between LLCs and LLPs are highlighted in Table 2.1.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     2.1 · Business Structures 43

Limited Liability Corporation                                 Limited Liability Partnership

Advantages                                    Disadvantages   Advantages                   Disadvantages

Fewer restrictions on eligibility (only one                                                Only certain
member allowed; can be professional,                                                       professions
although some states disallow professionals)                                               eligible

                                              Limited         Personal protection as well

Usually more personal liability protection    protection from as protection from
                                              partners' actions negligence of other
                                                              partners

Flexibility in taxation                       Earnings        Earnings taxed just once     Must file taxes
                                              included in                                  as pass-
                                              members'                                     through entity
                                              personal taxes

Table 2.1 Advantages and Disadvantages of LLCs and LLPs

LLCs and LLPs have gained great popularity in recent years, but larger companies still find substantial
advantages in being structured as C corporations. This is primarily due to the benefits of raising capital to
support long-term growth. It is interesting to note that LLC and LLP organizational structures were essentially
devised by attorneys. They generally are rather complicated, and the legal protection offered to their
ownership principals may vary from state to state. For these reasons, it is usually necessary to retain a
knowledgeable lawyer when establishing an organization of this type.

Obviously, when a company is choosing an organizational structure, it must carefully evaluate the advantages
and disadvantages that come with any form of doing business. For example, if an organization is considering a
corporation structure, it would have to evaluate the trade-off of having the ability to raise greater amounts of
funding to support growth and future expansion versus the effects of double taxation. Yet despite such
organizational concerns with corporations, time has proven that the value of most businesses, other than
relatively small ones, is very likely to be maximized if they are organized as corporations. This follows from the
idea that limited ownership liability reduces the overall risks borne by investors. All other things being equal,
the lower a firm's risk, the higher its value.

Growth opportunities will also have a tremendous impact on the overall value of a business. Because
corporations can raise financing more easily than most other types of organizations, they are better able to
engage in profitable projects, make investments, and otherwise take superior advantage of their many
favorable growth opportunities.

The value of any asset will, to a large degree, depend on its liquidity. Liquidity refers to asset characteristics
that enable the asset to be sold or otherwise converted into cash in a relatively short period of time and with
minimal effort to attain fair market value for the owner. Because ownership of corporate stock is far easier to
transfer to a potential buyer than is any interest in a business proprietorship or partnership, and because
most investors are more willing to invest their funds in stocks than they are in partnerships that may carry
unlimited liability, an investment in corporate stock will remain relatively liquid. This, too, is an advantage of a
corporation and is another factor that enhances its value.

 LINK TO LEARNING

 Amazon

  Most people are surprised to learn than Amazon, the largest online retailer, is set up as an LLC.
44 2 · Corporate Structure and Governance

        Amazon.com Services LLC is set up as a subsidiary of the larger Amazon.com Inc. Take a look at the Amazon
        LLC company profile provided by Dun & Bradstreet (https://openstax.org/r/company-profiles-amazon).
        Why do you think such a large corporation is set up as an LLC?

     Incorporating a Business

      Many business owners decide to structure their business as a corporation. In order to begin the process of
      incorporation, an organization must file a business registration form with the US state in which it will be based
      and carry on its primary business activities. The document that must be used for this application is generally
      referred to as the articles of incorporation or a corporate charter. Articles of incorporation are the single
      most important governing documents of a corporation. The registration allows the state to collect taxes and
      ensure that the business is complying with all applicable state laws.

      The exact form of the articles of incorporation differs depending on the type of corporation. Some types of
      articles of incorporation include the following:

        · Domestic corporation (in state)
        · Foreign corporation (out of state or out of country)
        · Close (closely held) corporation
        · Professional corporation
        · Nonprofit corporation (several different types of nonprofits)
        · Stock corporation
        · Non-stock corporation
        · Public benefit corporation

      It is important to note that articles of incorporation are only required to establish a regular corporation.
     Limited liability corporations require what are referred to as articles of organization (or similar documents) to
      register their business with a state. Some types of limited partnerships must also register with their state.
      However, sole proprietorships do not have to register; for this reason, they are often the preferred
      organizational structure for a person who is just starting out in business, at least initially.

      Articles of incorporation provide the basic information needed to legally form the company and register the
      business in its state. The state will need to know the name of the business, its purpose, and the people who
      will be in charge of running it (the board of directors). The state also needs to know about any stock that the
      business will be selling to the public. The websites of various secretaries of state will have information on the
      different types of articles of incorporation, the requirements, and the filing process.

     2.2 Relationship between Shareholders and Company Management

     Learning Outcomes

      By the end of this section, you will be able to:
        · Explain the difference between principals and agents.
        · List and discuss various stakeholders associated with a company and its operations.
        · Explain how management impacts the operations and future of a company.

     Stakeholders

      A stakeholder is any person or group that has an interest in the outcomes of an organization's actions.
      Stakeholders include employees, customers, shareholders, suppliers, communities, and governments.
      Different stakeholders have different priorities, and companies often have to make compromises to please as
      many stakeholders as possible.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     2.2 · Relationship between Shareholders and Company Management 45

Shareholders' Roles and Composition

A shareholder or stockholder can be a person, company, or organization that holds stock in a given company.
Shareholders typically receive dividends if the company does well and succeeds. They are entitled to vote on
certain company matters and to be elected to a seat on the board of directors. One advantage of being a
shareholder is that creditors cannot compel shareholders to pay for any of the company's financial obligations
or debts. However, being a shareholder includes responsibilities such as appointing the company's directors,
deciding on director compensation, setting limits on directors' power, and monitoring and approving the
company's financial statements.

Types of Shareholders

There are two types of shareholders: common shareholders and preferred shareholders. Common
shareholders are any persons who own a company's common stock. They have the right to control how the
company is managed, and they have the right to bring charges if management is involved in activities that
could potentially harm the organization. Preferred shareholders own a share of the company's preferred stock
and have no voting rights or involvement in managing the company. Instead, they receive a fixed amount of
annual dividends, apportioned before the common shareholders are paid. Though both common shareholders
and preferred shareholders see their stock value increase with the positive performance of the company,
common shareholders experience higher capital gains and losses.

Shareholders and directors are two different entities, although a director can also be shareholder. The
shareholder, as already mentioned, is a part owner of the company. A director, on the other hand, is the
person hired by the shareholders to perform oversight and provide strategic policy direction to company
management.

The Differences between a Shareholder and a Stakeholder

The terms shareholder and stakeholder mean different things. A shareholder is an owner of a company
because of the shares of stock they own. Stakeholders may not own part of the company, but they are in many
ways equally dependent on the performance of the company. However, their concerns may not be financial.
For example, a chain of hotels in the United States that employs thousands of people has several classes of
stakeholders, including employees who rely on the company for their jobs and local and national governments
that depend on the taxes the company pays.

Before a company becomes public, it is a private company that is run, formed, and organized by a group of
people called subscribers. A subscriber is a member of the company whose name is listed in the
memorandum of association. Even when the company goes public or they depart from the company,
subscribers' names continue to be written in the public register.

Role of Management

Corporations are run at the highest level by a group of senior managers referred to as the board of directors
(BOD). The BOD is ultimately responsible for providing oversight and strategic direction as well as overall
supervision of the organization at its highest managerial level. From an operational standpoint, the practical
day-to-day management of a company comprises of a team of several mid-level managers, who are
responsible for providing leadership to various departments in the company. Such managers may often have
different functional roles in a business organization. The primary roles of any management group involve
setting the objectives of the company; organizing operations; hiring, leading, and motivating employees; and
overseeing operations to ensure that company goals are continually being met.

It is also important that managers have a long-term focus on meeting growth targets and corporate
objectives. Unfortunately, there have been many examples of companies where the managerial focus was
shifted to short-term goals--quarterly or fiscal year earnings estimates or the current price of the company
stock--for personal reasons, such as increased bonuses and financial benefits. Such short-term thinking is
46 2 · Corporate Structure and Governance

      often not in the best interest of the long-term health and objectives of companies or their shareholders.

     2.3 Role of the Board of Directors

     Learning Outcomes

      By the end of this section, you will be able to:
        · Describe the oversight functions performed by boards.
        · Define an independent board member.
        · Compare arguments for and against having independent board members.
        · Describe ways boards can become diverse.

     Functions of a Board of Directors

      A board of directors is a group of people who are elected to represent shareholders, and these directors are
      then ultimately responsible for running the company. Every public company is legally required to install a
      board of directors. Nonprofit organizations and many private companies often establish a board of directors
      as well, even if they are not legally required to do so.
      The board is responsible for protecting shareholders' interests, establishing management policies, overseeing
      the corporation or organization, and making decisions about important issues. The board of directors acts as a
      fiduciary for shareholders. The board is also tasked with a number of other responsibilities, including setting
      company goals, creating dividend and stock option policies, hiring and firing chief executive officers (CEOs),
      and ensuring that the company has the resources it needs to perform well.
      Basic Structure of a Board of Directors
      The bylaws of a company or organization determine the structure, responsibilities, and powers given to a
      board of directors. The bylaws also determine how many board members there are, how the members are
      elected, and how frequently the board members meet.
      The board must represent shareholder and management interests, so it is best for the board to include both
      internal and external members. Usually, there is an internal director and an external director. The internal
      director is a member of the board who is involved with the daily workings of the company and manages the
      interests of shareholders, officers, and employees. The external director represents the interests of those who
      function outside of the company. The CEO often serves as the chairman of the company's board of directors.

       Figure 2.2 Corporate Boardroom (credit: "495 Express Lanes Board Room" by Fairfax County Chamber of Commerce/flickr, CC BY
       2.0)

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                         2.3 · Role of the Board of Directors 47

International Structure of a Board of Directors

The structure of a board of directors varies more outside of the United States. In Asia and the European Union,
there are commonly executive and supervisory boards. The executive board is made up of company insiders
who are elected by employees and shareholders. In most cases, the executive board is headed by the company
CEO or a managing officer. The supervisory board oversees daily business operations and acts much like a
typical US board of directors. The chair of the board varies, but the board is always led by someone other than
the prominent executive officer.

Oversight: Corporate Governance

Corporate governance is a discipline that focuses on how a company conducts its business and the various
controls that are implemented to ensure proper procedures and ethical behavior.

Although many companies and managers do operate with a fair and honest philosophy, others will try to
exploit the temporary benefits of actions that fall outside ethical behavior. Companies do not always adhere to
laws. You may have seen or read news stories about false reporting of earnings, failure to reveal financial
information, or payments of large bonuses to top executives shortly after a company files for bankruptcy.

In one infamous example, the insurance giant AIG paid for a lavish trip to California for top employees of the
company immediately after declaring that the company was insolvent. It asked for and received financial
support from the US government in the bailout of 2008.2

At other times, a company may cross the line between legal and illegal and violate the law in order to increase
profits. Because of the potential for human self-interest and greed, governments have enacted laws and
regulations that require specific actions of a company or restrict its activities in an effort to ensure fair
competition and ethical behavior.

Often, Congress enacts laws and regulations in response to major economic or other highly visible events.
Following the great market crash of 1929, the US government created a new set of rules and regulations
governing the issuing and trading of securities, the Securities Act of 1933 and the Securities Exchange Act of
1934. The government also created the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to oversee these laws
and regulations.

The new laws required that firms make available specific financial information to current owners and
prospective owners and that the SEC approve the initial sale of securities to the public. More recently,
following a series of major ethical lapses at some firms, the US government enacted new legislation in 2002.
One of the most sweeping acts is the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX), which requires, among other things, the
following:

  · That the CEO and chief financial officer (CFO) must attest to the fairness and accuracy of the company's
      financial reporting

  · That the company implements and maintains an effective structure of internal controls responsible for the
      reporting of financial results

  · That the company and an external public accounting firm confirm the effectiveness of the controls over
      the most recent fiscal year

In addition, SOX created the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, outlining the prohibited activities of
auditors. It also set a requirement that the SEC issue new rulings that establish compliance with the act.

Board of Directors Oversight and Corporate Governance

Because of the widely publicized control breakdowns at Wells Fargo Bank and recent regulatory actions,
boards of directors of public companies and financial institutions have been directed to improve oversight and

2 Scott Vogel. "You Paid for It: AIG's Retreat Destination, Up Close." Washington Post. October 9, 2008.
http://voices.washingtonpost.com/travellog/2008/10/disaster_tourism_comes_to_cali.html
48 2 · Corporate Structure and Governance

      corporate governance. Boards are evolving from focusing primarily on the needs of top key individuals to
      considering broader aspects of ethics, values, and corporate culture. Boards now oversee the monitoring
      systems being put in place and may take on direct responsibilities related to senior management.

      The Role of the Audit Committee

      A strong independent audit committee (AC) is an important part of the corporate governance efforts of any
      firm. The AC is formed by the board of directors as a separately chartered subcommittee of the board of
      directors. It reports regularly to the BOD and assists the board by assuming responsibilities for critical
      corporate financial matters, such as reviewing audit plans and findings, approving external public accountants,
      and coordinating the efforts of both internal and external financial reviews and audits. The audit committee
      provides expertise in all financial and accounting matters for a company, and it is therefore a critical part of a
      company's corporate governance efforts.

      Some important functions of the audit committee include

        · confirming the accuracy of the firm's financial reporting;
        · verifying that systems of internal control and risk management are operating effectively;
        · ensuring compliance with legal and regulatory requirements;
        · verifying the qualifications, independence, and performance of the external public auditing firm; and
        · coordinating the activities and performance of the internal audit function.

      The role of the audit committee has significantly expanded over the years, and it has become exceedingly
      important with the enactment of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. Due to this increase in importance and recognition,
      several boards have shifted some of the audit committee's responsibilities to separately chartered committees
      in order to create a balance of duties and ensure that those duties are effectively focused on and efficiently
      executed. Some of these additional committees have been known to include a compensation committee, a
      disclosure committee, and a governance committee, and they all have related objectives that need to be
      documented within the charter of each of the individual committees. It is important for the different
      committees to have close working relationships so that the audit committee can help each one fulfill its
      responsibilities to senior management, the greater board of directors, shareholders, and other stakeholders.

      The audit committee performs an internal audit to review the organization's corporate governance process
      and to communicate any recommendations for changes. The audit committee will usually follow up and
      monitor the process put in place to implement any changes or necessary improvements. As with any other
      corporate function, the audit committee's role is greatly affected by the legal, institutional, financial, cultural,
      and political circumstances that impact the company.

      Importance of Improving Oversight and Governance

      It is crucial to today's corporate environment that firms do not lose sight of achieving and maintaining strong
      and efficient oversight and governance. This is true despite the litany of other important items on the busy
      agendas of most boards.

      Keeping a focus on the critical ethics of management, as well as the traditional focus on the importance of
      ethics to the overall organization, is not only timely in this day and age but also sound business practice. The
      importance of establishing a comprehensive system of checks and balances cannot be overemphasized.
      Beginning with the chief executive officer, these checks and balances need to progress through senior
      management, and they ultimately include the board of directors itself. Similar checks and balances need to
      then filter down though the rest of the entire firm. By taking the appropriate steps to improve corporate
      oversight and governance, overall business risk can be mitigated and future operational problems reduced.
      Additionally, such steps can lead to the positive effects of achieving sustainable operational and financial
      benefits for a company and its shareholders.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                         2.3 · Role of the Board of Directors 49

 LINK TO LEARNING

 PepsiCo

  PepsiCo is a global leader in the food and beverage industry. It has also been noted for its excellence in
  corporate governance. Take a look at the PepsiCo website (https://openstax.org/r/pepsico). Why do you
  think the company has won numerous awards and was featured in Fortune's annual Blue Ribbon
  Companies list for 2021?

The Importance of Independence in Boards of Directors

An independent board of directors is composed of individuals who have no material interest in the company
other than their directorship. They maintain their independence by only accepting compensation from the
company for their BOD services. They also have their own information sources, instead of relying on
information provided by senior management of the company. It is considered a corporate governance best
practice to have independent members serve on boards of directors for both publicly and privately held
companies.

In most cases, board members have no affiliation with activities or organizations that could result in conflicts
of interest. An example of this might be a scenario in which a board is considering the formation of a
partnership or alliance with an organization that is directly associated with one of its board members. In such
an instance, a director might be excused from participating in that decision process, particularly if it is clear
that it would lead to potential conflict.

A board with a majority of independent directors can bring expertise and objectivity, which

  · helps assure ownership that the company is being run legally, ethically, and in the best interest of
      shareholders;

  · allows for both independence and objectivity regarding senior managerial representatives and limits
      situations in which a key decision maker might have a vested interest or an "ax to grind"; and

  · enables board members to advance discussions with no hidden agendas for self-advancement or other
      self-profiting motives.

The Importance of Diversity in Boards of Directors

As mentioned earlier, diversity can be an important quality for any board of directors. Increasingly over recent
years, corporate management has begun to appreciate the value of diversity in boards of directors. This has
resulted in a significant increase in the total number of women and people of color in boardrooms in the
United States. However, many business observers believe that corporate governance practices have a long
way to go in this respect. Increasing representation has now grown to become a high priority for most
businesses and organizations around the world.

Board members face many challenges in making decisions effectively and efficiently as possible. Because of
such challenges, the potential objective of diversifying the boardroom competes with other worthy topics and
objectives such as improving cybersecurity, advancing customer service, identifying and reducing risk,
improving community relations, and positioning strategically within an industry. This has left corporate
governance experts and researchers in a situation where they find themselves "playing catch-up" to
adequately diversify.
50 2 · Corporate Structure and Governance

     2.4 Agency Issues: Shareholders and Corporate Boards

     Learning Outcomes

      By the end of this section, you will be able to:
        · Define the concept of agency costs.
        · Discuss conflicts of interest between board members, company management, and employees.
        · Define each component of ESG.
        · Discuss the findings indicating how ESG policies impact stock returns.

     Agency Problems and Issues

     Agency problems refers to conflicts that occur when an agent (manager) who is entrusted with following the
      interests of the principal (shareholder or owner) of an organization abuses their position to further their own
      personal goals. In the field of corporate finance, agency problems are often related to a conflict of interest
      between the management of a company and its shareholders.

      For many years, this has been a very common problem that has been seen in nearly every kind of organization,
      irrespective of it being a church, a club, a not-for-profit organization, a multinational corporation, or any other
      government agency or institution. As with most problematic issues in business, agency problems can be
      resolved, but only if organizations are willing to take the appropriate steps to resolve them.

      Every company has its own set of goals and objectives, but it is important to note that the employee and
      personal goals of managers may differ and may not align with the goals and objectives of stockholders
      (ownership). Because these differences exist, and because all parties have a desire to maximize their own
      wealth, agency problems can often arise, having a negative impact on company profits, stock price, and the
      goodwill of the shareholder base.

      There are three primary types of agency problems, discussed below.

      CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

      Example of an Agency Problem

        ABC Co. used to sell organic shampoo for $15, but the stockholders of ABC lobbied for an increase in the
        selling price of the shampoo from $15 to $18. This was to increase earnings and, ultimately, their own
        personal wealth through an uptick in stock price. However, as a result of this unnecessary rise in the price
        of the shampoo, customers were disappointed, and a majority of them wound up boycotting the product.
        Additionally, some of the consumers who continued to purchase the product noticed a decline in the overall
        quality of the shampoo and were also very disappointed. In this scenario, agency problems surfaced
        between stockholders and loyal customers of the company.

      Stockholders versus Management

      Large corporations typically have a substantial number of stockholders forming their ownership. It is essential
      for an organization to separate the management of a company from this ownership in order to avoid this type
      of agency problem.

      Segregating ownership from management can be advantageous for an organization. Doing so will usually not
      have any effects on normal business operations. At the same time, the company can employ different experts
      and professionals to manage key operations of the business.

      However, a drawback to this is that hiring outsiders may eventually become troublesome for shareholders.
      External managers who are brought into a company may end up making self-serving decisions or even

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         2.4 · Agency Issues: Shareholders and Corporate Boards 51

misusing company funds. This could eventually result in declining bottom line results and company share
prices, which would then lead to conflicts of interests between stockholders and company management.

An example of an agency problem between management and shareholders occurred at WorldCom in 2001,
when their CEO used company assets to underwrite several personal loans.3 As a result of these inappropriate
actions, the company took on additional debt that negatively impacted WorldCom's capital structure, liquidity,
and ultimately its stock price. From this example, we can see how individual greed on the part of agents,
executives, or corporate management can lead to significant agency problems.

Investors versus Creditors

If a company decides to engage in risky investments and projects in order to drive organizational profitability,
these increased risk levels could threaten the company's ability to service (repay) their debts, leading to
possible default.

This additional risk could also result in creditors taking steps to devalue such debts, which in most cases refers
to company bond issues. In the end, if these riskier projects end up failing and the company loses money,
investors (bondholders) may also experience financial risk as bonds go into default or otherwise lose market
value. This then becomes a potential agency problem between bondholders (investors) and creditors.

Stockholders versus Other Stakeholders

Situations may arise in which stockholders of a firm find themselves in conflicts of interest with other
stakeholders of the company. For example, employees of a firm might be asking for a general wage increase.
If such a wage increase were voted down by stockholders, this could result in key employees departing the
organization, eventually leading to poorer business results and the dissatisfaction of other stakeholders in the
company as company profits decline. In such an example, we see the agency problem of stockholders versus
other stakeholders.

A more specific example of such an agency problem occurred in 2011, when Oregon-based food and gift
basket company Harry & David was forced to file for bankruptcy.4 This was a direct result of the company
being purchased through a leveraged buyout that left the company saddled with a tremendous amount of
debt. However, the most important factor leading to the company's failure was the actions of Steven Heyer,
who was a friend of the new owners and had been hired as CEO. Heyer, who was awarded an exorbitant
executive salary, was also allowed to sink the company into further debt. Harry & David has since emerged
from bankruptcy under new leadership. But this example should serve as a cautionary tale of what can happen
when stockholders are able to put their interests ahead of those of other stakeholders in a corporate
environment.

 CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

 Infamous Agency Problems

  Enron

  Enron is one particularly infamous example of an agency problem. Enron's directors were responsible for
  protecting and promoting investor interests, but they failed to carry out their regulatory and oversight
  responsibilities, enabling the company to venture into illegal activity. The company's resulting accounting
  scandal resulted in billions of dollars in losses to its investors.

  At one time, Enron had been one of the largest companies in the United States. Despite being a multibillion-

3 Anshita Kohli. "Worldcom Scam: The Fall of the Biggest US Telecommunication Company." The Company Ninja. JD Learning
Ventures, May 26, 2020. https://thecompany.ninja/worldcom-scam/
4 Beth Kowitt. "Harry & David's Failed Mr. Fix-It." Fortune. April 1, 2011. https://fortune.com/2011/04/01/harry-davids-failed-mr-fix-
it/
52 2 · Corporate Structure and Governance

        dollar company, Enron began losing money in 1997. It had also started incurring a tremendous amount of
        debt. Fearing a drop in stock prices, Enron's management team tried to disguise the problems by
        misrepresenting them through inappropriate accounting methods, which resulted in confusing and
        misleading financial statements.

        Disaster started to unfold in 2001, when common stock prices fell from $90 to under $1 per share. The
        company filed for bankruptcy in December 2001, and criminal charges were brought against several key
        Enron employees, including former CEO Kenneth Lay and former CFO Andrew Fastow. Jeffrey Skilling was
        subsequently named CEO in February 2001, but he ended up resigning six months later.

        Bernard L. Madoff Investment Securities LLC

        Ponzi schemes are common examples of the agency problem. Agency theory claims that a lack of
        oversight and incentive alignment greatly contributes to these problems. Many investors fall into Ponzi
        schemes thinking that taking fund management outside a traditional banking institution reduces fees and
        saves money.

        Even though established financial institutions reduce risk by providing oversight and enforcing legal
        practices, some Ponzi schemes simply involve taking advantage of consumer suspicions about the banking
        industry and financial markets. In this type of environment, the consumer cannot ensure that an agent is
        acting in their best interest. Investments are made under limited or, in many cases, completely nonexistent
        oversight.

        Bernie Madoff's scam is probably one of the most infamous examples of a Ponzi scheme. Madoff's fraud
        started with friends, relatives, and acquaintances in New York, but it ultimately grew to encompass major
        charities such as Hadassah, universities such as Tufts and Yeshiva, institutional investors, and wealthy
        families in Europe, Latin America, and Asia. The cash losses of Madoff's scheme were recently estimated to
        be between $17 billion and $20 billion. The returns he promised were higher than what most investment
        firms and banks were offering--so promising that almost all of his investors ignored any concerns they may
        have had and basically looked the other way. Madoff paid for any redemption requests with money that
        had been newly invested.

        Madoff's Ponzi scheme fell apart when he could no longer pay his investors. He was criminally charged,
        convicted, and given a 150-year prison sentence. Madoff died in April 2021 while serving his prison term.

        (Sources: Diana B. Henriques. "Bernard Madoff, Architect of Largest Ponzi Scheme in History, Is Dead at
        82." New York Times. April 14, 2021. https://www.nytimes.com/2021/04/14/business/bernie-madoff-
        dead.html; Chase Peterson-Withorn. "The Investors Who Had to Pay Back Billions in Ill-Gotten Gains from
        Bernie Madoff's Ponzi Scheme." Forbes. April 14, 2021. https://www.forbes.com/sites/chasewithorn/2021/
        04/14/the-investors-who-had-to-pay-back-billions-in-ill-gotten-gains-from-bernie-madoffs-ponzi-scheme/;
        Adam Hayes. "The Agency Problem: Two Infamous Examples." Investopedia. Dotdash, updated April 15,
        2021. https://www.investopedia.com/ask/answers/041315/what-are-some-famous-scandals-demonstrate-
        agency-problem.asp)

     How to Resolve Agency Problems

      Ultimately, agency problems result from the differences among the interests of a company's management,
      other stakeholders of the firm, and its ownership or stockholders. When perpetuated, these differences may
      eventually result in lasting conflicts of interest. In order for companies to avoid such problems, it is imperative
      that they address the underlying problems of these differences. This will help ensure that normal business
      operations are not being adversely impacted by the agency problem.

      While there is no surefire way to resolve all conflicts of interest and agency problems, some measures that can

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         2.4 · Agency Issues: Shareholders and Corporate Boards 53

help mitigate such issues include the following:
  · Offering incentives to management for strong performance and ethical behavior
  · Awarding decision makers with stock packages, commissions, and other long-term compensation
      packages to encourage long-term thinking and matching of company objectives with shareholders'
      priorities
  · Penalizing poor performance, shortsightedness, and unethical behavior

The prevailing belief in agency theory is that when a business creates organizational incentives that encourage
hard work on projects that will benefit the company in both the short and long term, more employees will be
encouraged to act in the business's best interest.
Another means of resolving agency problems is through a hostile takeover of the organization. Even the threat
of such a takeover may be effective in reducing or eliminating these conflicts of interest. A hostile corporate
takeover tends to unify and discipline a management or agent group, thus fostering a union of agent and
shareholder interests. When such a potential threat or outright ownership change is introduced to a company,
its managers are more likely to act in the best long-term interests of the shareholders in order to maintain
their leadership positions within the company.
By better aligning agent (management) and principal (ownership) goals, agency theory attempts to bridge any
gulfs among employees, employers, and stakeholders that are created by the principal-agent problem. While it
is recognized as being nearly impossible for companies to eliminate the ongoing agency problem, it is also
recognized that it is possible to minimize its negative effects.

Impact of ESG Ratings

In recent years, many publicly traded companies, as well as many that are privately owned, are being
evaluated and rated according to environmental, social, and governance (ESG) factors. These ratings and
evaluations are primarily conducted by third-party organizations. As a result, the investment community is
using these reports and ratings to an ever-increasing degree in order to measure and assess corporate ESG
factors and performance.
Environmental, social, and governance issues have become an important part of the investment community's
evaluation of publicly traded companies. Each component of what is now referred to as ESG has equal
importance in ongoing corporate evaluations, as per Figure 2.3 below. It is critical for the senior management
of any corporation to stay abreast of any and all ESG issues as they arise and take immediate corrective action
when necessary.

                                                 Figure 2.3 Importance of ESG Factors to a Business Concern

ESG measurements and assessments have become very important to firms, as they often become the basis of
formal and informal buy recommendations by investment professionals. ESG ratings were originally developed
to assist in determining the general risk of ESG factors for any public company, but they have since grown to
become unique scores used by investors to gauge the potential attractiveness of investment in the subject
company. Because of the nature of these factors, firms that are rated with high ESG metrics are believed to
54 2 · Corporate Structure and Governance

      represent superior investments and to have proactive management teams focused on creating long-term
      value of company stock.

      Thus, with investors increasingly using ESG scores to form their investment strategies, the consequences of a
      poor rating can have a negative impact on a firm's share price and result in substantial problems. In any case,
      it is important to note that ESG is only a starting point from which it is possible to gather indicators on a
      business and its direction. In the end, it does not present the entire story of a firm. Any investment decisions
      about the company in question should include a significant amount of additional data.

     2.5 Interacting with Investors, Intermediaries, and Other Market Participants

     Learning Outcomes

      By the end of this section, you will be able to:
        · Define the investor relations function.
        · Discuss how the investor relations office interacts with investors, regulators, and other corporate
            stakeholders.
        · Describe the topics most often discussed during a quarterly conference call.
        · Explain how press release information impacts company stock prices.

     Investor Relations

      Within the general field of corporate public relations is a specific subdivision referred to as investor relations
      (IR). IR involves elements of communication, marketing, and finance and is designed to control the flow of
      information from the management of a public corporation to its investors and stakeholders.

      Because the investment community plays such a critical role in the overall growth and success of any
      corporation, it is imperative that firms maintain strong and open relationships with their shareholder or
      potential investor audience. IR was developed to take responsibility for achieving and maintaining these
      crucial relationships.

      Investor relations are quite different from typical public relations practices. A firm's IR group must work very
      closely with the accounting and legal departments, as well as with members of the senior management team,
      such as the CEO and CFO.

      As might be expected, IR has far more regulatory obligations than standard public relations functions, largely
      due to corporate reporting requirements enforced by the SEC and the International Financial Reporting
      Standards (IFRS). IR became significantly more important in 2002, when the United States Congress passed
      the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX), also known as the Public Company Accounting Reform and Investor Protection
      Act. This legislation resulted in requirements that dramatically increased the extent of financial reporting for
      any publicly traded company. SOX was enacted in an attempt to prevent the occurrence of corporate financial
      scandals such as the one notoriously committed by the Enron Corporation that we discussed earlier.

      In summary, investor relations functions have responsibilities including, but not limited to,

        · coordinating live shareholder meetings and press conferences;
        · disseminating financial information to the investment community;
        · conducting briefings to the financial analyst community;
        · publishing the quarterly report and annual report; and
        · addressing any issues that arise as a result of financial disclosure.

      The best time to form an internal IR function or to engage an IR firm is when a company begins the process of
      becoming publicly traded through an initial public offering, or IPO.

     Quarterly Earnings Conference Calls

      As a result of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, all publicly traded companies are required to file certain

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     2.5 · Interacting with Investors, Intermediaries, and Other Market Participants 55

financial reports with the SEC. The underlying purpose of these requirements is to provide shareholders and
the investment community with important operational and financial information on a regular basis and in a
transparent manner. Reports filed with the SEC include the annual Form 10-K, quarterly Form 10-Qs, and
current periodic Form 8-Ks, in addition to proxy reports and certain shareholder and affiliate reporting
documents. Quarterly 10-Qs are an ongoing and regular reporting requirement of publicly traded companies
and are to be filed within 45 days following the end of each fiscal quarter.
Depending on a company's size and the complexity of its operation, a firm is likely to issue an earnings press
release and conduct a conference call with the investment community within this same 45-day period. There
is no legal requirement for companies to do either of these things, but experts in IR view these
communications tools as best practice. They can add context and commentary to the reported financial
results.
It is important for companies to do their planning and not enter a quarterly earnings conference call
unprepared. There is a multitude of available resources for companies to analyze and review in preparation.
Among such resources are industry reports prepared by government agencies; the financial reports and
earnings calls of competing organizations, both within and outside of a company's primary industry; and
financial research reports prepared by various covering analysts, who follow the specific company and are
employed by financial brokerage firms.

Investment Meetings and Conferences

Organizing the annual meeting of shareholders, investor roadshows, and investment conferences is no easy
task for any corporation, though all of these audience-facing events are critical to maintaining strong relations
with shareholders and the investment community. It is important to reach shareholders and investors on an
almost personal basis by crafting a successful and interesting investment story. For effective investor relations,
key messages supporting any ownership or potential investment case should be clear and consistent. These
key messages should be embedded within the company's materials and should form the basis of
presentations, the corporate website, and annual reports. They should also be reinforced via concrete
examples during annual meetings, roadshows, and investor presentations.

        Figure 2.4 Quarterly Investor Relations Presentation (credit: "MAPFRE" by Castilla y León Económica/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Corporations have found that using senior management's time efficiently is also important to investor
relations. By targeting the ownership and potential investing audience, senior executives can make the best
use of their time and improve their interactions with the investing public during these events. If smaller
companies outsource the investor meeting planning process, the third-party firm should be thoroughly
grounded in the client's corporate culture.
56 2 · Corporate Structure and Governance

      The most productive investor and shareholder meetings begin with a strong, understandable corporate
      introduction and continue by delivering an engaging story that demonstrates the company's successes, a
      track record of growth, and the high probability of favorable future prospects. Additionally, it is important for a
      company's senior management to end any meeting with feedback from the investor audience and set
      timelines for follow-up. There will always be times when something unexpected may happen and the addition
      of information or impromptu changes to scheduled agendas may occur. It is at times like these when
      understanding the body language and facial expressions of an audience can be critical in producing a
      favorable outcome of the meeting.

      It is unlikely that the decision to invest or to remain an investor will be made based on a single corporate
      event, but impressions, good or bad, will certainly factor into such decisions over a period of time. Thus, it is
      important for IR officers to understand the importance of follow-up communication with their audience.

     Purposes of Corporate Press Releases

      Press releases have always been a vital tool in the communications toolkit of an IR professional. Various social
      media channels are also becoming increasingly popular for delivering company information and news.
      However, the press release remains a standard medium for most companies to communicate corporate news,
      results, and ideas.

      Press releases can be written with various intentions. Whether to release financial information, unveil new
      products or services, announce changes in management, or a host of other reasons, all communications have
      a different objective. Not all press releases are created equally, and they have varying degrees of effectiveness.
      Any press release should contain information in easy-to-understand language that is free of corporate jargon
      and as concise as possible. Press releases may be viewed by multiple audiences, such as customers,
      stakeholders, investors, potential investors, and the general public, which is vital to consider when drafting a
      press release.

      According to PR Newswire statistics, press releases that contain multimedia content have been known to
      substantially increase press release views.5 Using infographics and charts where possible and relaying the key
      messages in short, easy-to-digest points make a press release easier for the reader to take in. Quotes from
      senior management can provide valuable insight, but they should not provide any new information; they
      should simply extend or expand on a subject already mentioned and further back up a claim.

      LINK TO LEARNING

      Press Releases Approved by PR Newswire

        Take a look at this press release on mobile drive-in movies during the COVID-19 pandemic
        (https://openstax.org/r/mobile-drive-in-movies).

        How would you judge this press release? Is it effective? Why or why not?

     2.6 Companies in Domestic and Global Markets

     Learning Outcomes

      By the end of this section, you will be able to:
        · Explain why corporations expand beyond domestic borders.
        · Determine how different strategic decisions may influence corporate performance.

       5 "Multimedia Content Distribution." PR Newswire. Cision, accessed August 27, 2021. https://www.prnewswire.com/products/
       multimedia-distribution-options.html

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                    2.6 · Companies in Domestic and Global Markets 57

Important Differences among Domestic, International, and Global Organizations

If a company becomes global or multinational in scope, fundamental analysis of the organization by the
investment community can become more complex. In order to better understand a company, it is important to
determine what laws affect the company's governance process and which set of accounting rules is used to
fashion its financial reports.

Domestic companies operate completely or for the most part within the borders of the United States. While
such organizations may import raw materials and supplies from other nations or end up exporting their
finished products to other countries around the world, in the end, these international activities represent only
a very small portion of their overall business activities.

Domestic companies are typically governed by US accounting and securities laws that have been established
by the SEC. Further, financial reporting for these domestic organizations is to be completed using Generally
Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP).

International firms, while based in the United States, will typically maintain significant levels of international
investment and conduct operations that may be quite diverse, both geographically and culturally. For such
international firms, parent company accounting will usually adhere to GAAP standards. Conversely, non-US
subsidiaries of such international firms may be regulated by laws dictated by their host countries. These will
often differ significantly from those in the United States.

In recent years, accounting regulations in countries outside the United States have come under the jurisdiction
of International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). It should be noted that guidelines and regulations under
IFRS and those under GAAP can differ significantly. As a result of these regulatory differences, any specific
divergences in accounting or governance practices between foreign subsidiaries and a US parent company
should be clearly stated and disclosed in the parent company's financial reports.

Global firms have substantial operations and investments in different countries (global markets), and they
may have no single center or basis of operational activity. In such cases, regulations for corporate governance
are usually determined by the laws of the country in which the parent company has been established. While
there are some global firms that report their financial statements according to GAAP standards, usually to
satisfy the informational needs of US investors, most global parent companies' financials will adhere to IFRS
reporting standards.

Difference in Financial Reporting: GAAP versus IFRS

Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) and International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) were
designed with similar objectives in mind: to provide a common and structured set of guidelines to assist in the
preparation of accurate and unbiased financial reporting for public corporations.

Yet despite these commonalities in purpose, there are important differences between them. Among these are
differences in inventory accounting and reporting, guidelines for consolidation of subsidiaries, and the
accounting and reporting of minority interests.

 LINK TO LEARNING

 GAAP and IFRS

  Learn more about US GAAP reporting from the SEC website (https://openstax.org/r/corpfin-manual), and
  learn about international standards from the IFRS website (https://openstax.org/r/ifrs-org).

SEC Reporting and EDGAR

EDGAR (Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis, and Retrieval system) is the primary system for collecting and
58 2 · Corporate Structure and Governance

      indexing documents submitted by companies to the SEC under the Securities Act of 1933, the Securities
      Exchange Act of 1934, the Trust Indenture Act of 1939, and the Investment Company Act of 1940.

      LINK TO LEARNING
      EDGAR System

        The SEC's EDGAR system (https://openstax.org/r/edgar-html) contains millions of corporate and individual
        filings. It benefits investors, corporations, and the US economy overall by increasing the efficiency,
        transparency, and fairness of the securities markets. The system processes about 3,000 filings per day,
        serves up 3,000 terabytes of data to the public annually, and accommodates 40,000 new filers per year on
        average.6

       6 "About EDGAR." US Securities and Exchange Commission. Modified March 23, 2021. https://www.sec.gov/edgar/about
       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                  2 · Summary 59

     Summary

2.1 Business Structures

The most common forms of business organizations are sole proprietorships, partnerships, corporations, and
hybrids. There are advantages and disadvantages to each type of organization involving ease of formation, tax
requirements, and personal liabilities. The most common type of organization for larger businesses is the
corporation, the establishment of which involves filing articles of incorporation.

2.2 Relationship between Shareholders and Company Management

A stakeholder is any individual or group that has an interest in the outcomes of an organization's actions.
Shareholders are relevant to a corporation form of business because they own stock in the corporation. The
board of directors of a company is ultimately responsible to shareholders for effectively running the business.

2.3 Role of the Board of Directors

The board of directors acts as a fiduciary for shareholders. The board is also tasked with a number of other
responsibilities, including setting company goals, creating dividend and stock option policies, hiring and firing
CEOs, and ensuring that the company has the resources it needs to perform well. Diversity and experience
play important roles in corporate governance and in the strength and effectiveness of a board of directors.

2.4 Agency Issues: Shareholders and Corporate Boards

Issues and conflicts of interest might arise between shareholders (public ownership) and senior management,
including C-level executives and the board of directors. Although there is no definite way to resolve all conflicts
of interest, some measures that can help mitigate problems include offering incentives for strong
performance and ethical behavior and awarding decision makers with stock packages to encourage long-term
thinking.

2.5 Interacting with Investors, Intermediaries, and Other Market Participants

Investor relations are important to a company's overall corporate governance strategy. Effective
communication that is straightforward, open, and free of potentially confusing corporate jargon has become a
critical component of a company's image, overall message, and long-term success.

2.6 Companies in Domestic and Global Markets

Companies sometimes expand internationally, and there are advantages and disadvantages of such growth.
International or global expansion efforts require careful and efficient communication, planning, and financing.

     Key Terms

agency theory a principle that is used to explain and resolve issues in the relationship between business
    principals and their agents, most commonly between shareholders (principals) and company executives
    (agents)

agent a person who acts on behalf of another person or group
annual meeting a meeting of the general membership and shareholders of a corporation; also known as an

    annual general meeting (AGM)
annual report a document describing a public corporation's operations and financial condition that must be

    provided to shareholders once per year; also known as Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) Form
    10-K
articles of incorporation a set of formal documents filed with a government body to legally document the
    creation of a corporation
board of directors (BOD) a group of people who jointly supervise the activities of an organization
C corporation a legal structure for a corporation in which the owners, or shareholders, are taxed separately
60 2 · Key Terms

    from the entity
close (closely held) corporation a company that has only a limited number of shareholders
conference call a meeting or presentation conducted via telephone or internet to relay company

    information to all interested parties, including institutional and individual investors, as well as buy-and-sell
    side analysts; also known as an earnings conference call
corporate governance the system of rules, practices, and processes by which a firm is directed and
    controlled
corporation a legal entity that is separate and distinct from its owners
domestic corporation (in state) a corporation incorporated under the laws of the country or state in which
    it does business
Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis, and Retrieval system (EDGAR) the primary system for collecting and
    indexing documents submitted by companies and others under the Securities Act of 1933, the Securities
    Exchange Act of 1934, the Trust Indenture Act of 1939, and the Investment Company Act of 1940
ESG environmental, social, and governance (ESG) standards for a company's operations that socially
    conscious investors use to screen potential investments
foreign corporation (out of state or out of country) an existing corporation that conducts business in a
    state or jurisdiction other than where it was originally incorporated
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) a common set of accounting principles, standards, and
    procedures issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB)
global markets economies or markets that are multinational in nature, spanning several different countries
    or jurisdictions
hybrid form of business a limited liability company (LLC) or limited liability partnership (LLP) that combines
    the characteristics of a corporation with those of a sole proprietorship or partnership
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) accounting standards used by international
    corporations, issued by the IFRS Foundation and the International Accounting Standards Board
investor a person or an entity, such as a firm or mutual fund, that invests capital with the expectation of
    receiving financial returns
investor relations (IR) a strategic management responsibility that is capable of integrating finance,
    communication, marketing, and securities law compliance to enable the most effective two-way
    communication between a company and the financial community or other constituencies, which ultimately
    contributes to a company's securities achieving fair valuation
limited liability corporation (LLC) a US-specific form of a private limited company; a business structure that
    can combine the pass-through taxation of a partnership or sole proprietorship with the limited liability of a
    corporation
limited liability partnership (LLP) a partnership in which some or all partners have limited liabilities; can
    exhibit elements of both partnerships and corporations
non-stock corporation a corporation that does not have owners represented by shares of stock but typically
    has members who are the functional equivalent of stockholders in a stock corporation (having the right to
    vote, etc.); describes the vast majority of not-for-profit corporations
nonprofit (not-for-profit) corporation a legal entity that has been incorporated under the law of its
    jurisdiction for purposes other than making profits for its owners or shareholders
partnership a formal arrangement by two or more parties to manage and operate a business and share its
    profits and liabilities equally
press release an official statement delivered to members of the news media for the purpose of making an
    announcement or otherwise providing information
principal the person with the highest authority or most important position in a company, organization,
    institution, or group
professional corporation a form of corporate entity used by licensed professionals such as attorneys,
    architects, engineers, public accountants, and physicians, which is regulated by special provisions in many
    corporation statutes

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                             2 · CFA Institute 61

public benefit corporation a specific type of Delaware general corporation that is owned by shareholders
    who expect the company to make a profit and return some of that money to them in the form of dividends

quarterly report a document describing a public corporation's operations and financial condition that must
    be provided to shareholders four times per year; also known as Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)
    Form 10-Q

S corporation a closely held corporation that makes a valid election to be taxed under Subchapter S of
    Chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code, which does not require such corporations to pay income taxes and
    instead taxes owners as individuals

secretaries of state the state officials who head the agencies responsible for, among other functions, the
    chartering of businesses (usually including partnerships and corporations) that wish to operate within their
    state and, in most states, for maintaining all records on business activities within the state; also known as
    secretaries of the commonwealth in Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, and Virginia

Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) a large, independent agency of the United States federal
    government whose primary purpose is to enforce laws against market manipulation; created following the
    stock market crash of 1929 to protect investors and the national banking system

shareholder (stockholder) an individual or institution that legally owns one or more shares of the share
    capital of a public or private corporation; may be referred to as members of a corporation

sole proprietor (and sole proprietorship) a form of business that is operated and run by a single individual,
    known as the sole trader, with no legal distinction between the owner and the business entity

stakeholder a person with an interest or concern in a business
stock corporation a for-profit organization that issues shares of stock to shareholders (also known as

    stockholders) to raise capital, with each share representing partial ownership of the corporation and
    granting shareholders certain ownership rights to shape company policies
subscriber an initial shareholder of a company at the time of its incorporation whose name appears on the
    memorandum of association, a legal document prepared in the formation and registration process of a
    company to define its relationship with shareholders

     CFA Institute

This chapter supports some of the Learning Outcome Statements (LOS) in this CFA® Level I Study Session
(https://openstax.org/r/cfa-institute-org). Reference with permission of CFA Institute.

     Multiple Choice

 1. An S corporation _______________.
      a. is taxed in the same manner as a C corporation
      b. is eligible for more efficient financing in the face of company growth than a C corporation
       c. is usually more difficult to form than a C corporation
      d. is not taxed at the corporate level, unlike a C corporation

 2. An important advantage of a sole proprietorship is that _______________.
      a. it is easier to raise capital under such a structure than under other organizational forms
      b. it allows for an unlimited life of the business
       c. it is relatively easy to create
      d. Both a and b are correct.

 3. A shareholder is someone who _______________.
      a. sits on the audit committee of a firm
      b. is an ex-employee of a company
       c. profits from the favorable results of a company
62 2 · Multiple Choice

      d. follows the company for an investment firm

 4. Effective corporate governance includes all of the following EXCEPT _______________.
      a. fairness
      b. accountability
       c. objectivity
      d. higher share price

 5. A stakeholder is someone who _______________.
      a. is required to read a company's annual report
      b. answers to a board of directors
       c. has a vested interest in a company's success
      d. is hired to do a specific job

 6. "An effective business leader will recognize the social and environmental responsibilities of their business
     as well as the eventual goal of achieving long-term, sustainable global development." This statement
     refers to _______________.
      a. employing an experienced environmental consulting firm
      b. the advantages of having an audit committee
       c. having a diversified and well-experienced board of directors
      d. practicing strong corporate governance

 7. An important component of a strong board of directors (BOD) is having members who are _______________.
      a. former employees of the company
      b. able to write a strong corporate press release
       c. culturally diverse and experienced in the industry
      d. new to the industry and without preconceptions

 8. Which of the following is NOT a reason why a company needs good corporate governance?
      a. to avoid mismanagement of the company
      b. to enable the company to raise capital more efficiently and mitigate financial and operational risk to
           stakeholders
       c. to analyze the company's operations and systems of internal control in order to detect and prevent
           various forms of fraud and other accounting irregularities
      d. to increase the company's overall accountability and prevent significant organizational problems

 9. Who ultimately runs the company operations for a large corporation?
      a. shareholders
      b. board of directors
       c. external auditors
      d. stakeholders

10. One of the ways in which companies attempt to mitigate short-term managerial focus is by offering
      managers _______________.
       a. increased vacation time
      b. increased paid sick leave
       c. stock options
      d. comprehensive health insurance

11. Which of the following are used to ensure fiduciary responsibility?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         2 · Multiple Choice 63

       a. audits
      b. press releases
       c. end-of-year financial ledgers
      d. a letter from the board of directors

12. Which of the following is NOT one of the roles of an audit committee?
       a. reviewing the work of the internal audit
      b. reviewing systems of internal control.
       c. ensuring that appropriate resources are used in company operations
      d. launching special investigations of employees, company practices, or procedures

13. Which of the following is a major issue addressed in corporate governance?
       a. improving banking relations
      b. ethics and its implementation
       c. improving profits for shareholders
      d. expanding operations internationally

14. Agency problems are essentially _______________.
       a. conflicts of interest
      b. problems with the IRS
       c. fraudulent business activities
      d. nepotism

15. The term ESG, when used in the context of corporate governance, refers to which of the following?
       a. earnings, shareholders, and governance
      b. earnings, social, and general profit
       c. environmental, social, and goals
      d. environmental, social, and governance

16. Which of the following is the best method to ensure that shareholders are well informed of corporate
      policies and financial results?
       a. self-evaluation and training for members of the board of directors
      b. hiring a prestigious independent public accounting firm
       c. ensuring cultural diversity and public speaking eloquence of the senior management team
      d. conducting well-organized shareholder meetings and conference calls with the investment
            community

17. The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) requires that public corporations file which of the
      following financial reports on a quarterly basis?
       a. Form 10-K
      b. Form 8-Q
       c. Form 10-Q
      d. Form Q

18. Investor relations has substantially more _______________.
       a. regulatory obligations than standard public relations because of government-mandated financial and
            legal requirements
      b. personnel within a company dedicated to its function compared to other corporate departments
       c. interpretations regarding its effective implementation and use than other managerial and financial
            disciplines
64 2 · Review Questions

      d. documented historical cases of corporate failure than other managerial and financial disciplines

19. The corporate press release is _______________.
       a. no longer an important component of modern investor relations strategy
      b. not yet a thing of the past, though it is highly likely to be replaced by social media in the near future
       c. written by the chief financial officer in conjunction with the audit committee
      d. best written to be easy to understand, free of corporate jargon, and as concise as possible

20. International firms are _______________.
       a. headquartered in a non-US country but have homogeneous profit centers with little differentiation in
            product or service
      b. based in the United States but operate through the use of heavy investments outside the country via
            multinational profit centers
       c. larger and more complex than their domestic counterparts
      d. more likely to be formed as partnerships or sole proprietorships than as corporations

     Review Questions

 1. What are the key differences between the potential life of a business that is formed as a sole
     proprietorship and that of a business set up as a corporation?

 2. What are the most common types of firms that are organized as limited liability partnerships?
 3. What advantages does a sole proprietorship offer?
 4. What are major disadvantages of a sole proprietorship?
 5. If a company wishes to limit the liability of some of its investing partners, what form of business might it

     consider? Explain briefly.
 6. In order to form a corporation, what is the most important document required?
 7. What is the difference between a shareholder and a stakeholder?
 8. What group within a corporation has the primary responsibility for protecting the interests of

     shareholders?
 9. What is corporate governance?
10. What role does a corporation's board of directors play in corporate governance?
11. Briefly explain the concept of corporate governance.
12. What is the key component of agency theory, and why might this be more important to a public company

      than to one that is privately held?

     Video Activity

Corporate Governance (Introduction)
Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/corporate_governance)
 1. a. Describe the five key responsibilities of the board of directors of a company. Why are each of these

               responsibilities important to the operation of the organization as a whole?
         b. Discuss important related concepts, such as establishing corporate objectives, determining

               strategies to reach those objectives, providing leadership, supervising management of the business,
               and reporting to shareholders on the status and operations of the business.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            2 · Video Activity 65

          c. Discuss why these responsibilities of the board of directors may be more important for a public
               corporation than for a privately held company.

 2. a. What are three essential best practices in corporate governance? Discuss important relevant
               concepts, such as separation of duties, the need for non-executive directors, the importance of
               board member independence from other executives, company operations, and financial ties, as well
               as the importance of a non-executive audit committee.

         b. Discuss why corporate governance is an ongoing process that must continuously be evaluated by a
               company even after separation of duties, independence, and audit committees have been
               established.

The Basics of Corporate Governance

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/the-basics-of-corporate-governance)
 3. What is meant by LEARR in the context of governance codes? Discuss the various components that are

     referred to in the LEARR acronym and why they are important to a company's continuing operations.

 4. Discuss the role of corporate governance in attempting to minimize agency problems and ensuring that a
     company's directors and management act in the best interest of the shareholders.
66 2 · Video Activity
Access for free at openstax.org
3 · Why It Matters                                                                                                            67

 3
              Economic Foundations: Money and Rates

Figure 3.1 Every company is impacted by the global economy. (credit: "World Currency" by Kari/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline

  3.1 Microeconomics
  3.2 Macroeconomics
  3.3 Business Cycles and Economic Activity
  3.4 Interest Rates
  3.5 Foreign Exchange Rates
  3.6 Sources and Characteristics of Economic Data

      Why It Matters

American Airlines is one of the largest airlines in the world, flying to 350 destinations in 50 countries.1 The
managers of American Airlines are running a complex company. They have to be familiar with aeronautical
science, they have to know the laws and regulations impacting commercial air travel, and they must keep
abreast of global weather conditions. There is a lot to know about the airline industry itself.

However, operating a company such as American Airlines requires more than knowledge of the science and
technology of the industry. American Airlines does not operate in a vacuum. Like every company, it is impacted
by the economic environment in which it operates. American Airlines has to be familiar with how supply and
demand will impact fuel costs and other expenses. It must also be familiar with macroeconomic trends. During
periods of high unemployment, it may be difficult for the company to sell tickets to people wanting to travel to
vacation getaways. During periods of low unemployment, American Airlines may find it difficult to hire quality
workers at a wage rate it considers reasonable. Global economic conditions will also impact American Airlines;
as the economies of Europe expand rapidly, the euro will increase in value and impact the cost of items that
American Airlines purchases along its European routes.

In "Item 1A. Risk Factors," beginning on page 16 of the 2019 annual report for American Airlines
(https://openstax.org/r/2019-annual-report-for-american-airlines), the company lists some of the ways that it

1 American Airlines. "American Airlines Group." AA.com. Accessed October 25, 2021. https://www.aa.com/i18n/customer-service/
about-us/american-airlines-group.jsp
68 3 · Economic Foundations: Money and Rates

is impacted by macroeconomic and microeconomic conditions and the risks that these conditions place on the
company. In this chapter, we explore some of the economic concepts that managers should use as part of
their strategic plan.

 3.1 Microeconomics

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Identify equilibrium price and quantity.
  · Discuss how changes in demand will impact equilibrium price and quantity.
  · Discuss how changes in supply will impact equilibrium price and quantity.

Demand

Microeconomics focuses on the decisions and actions of individual agents, such as businesses or customers,
within the economy. The interactions of the decisions that businesses and customers make will determine the
price and quantity of a good or service that is sold in the marketplace. Financial managers need a strong
foundation in microeconomics. This foundation helps them understand the market for the company's
products and services, including pricing considerations. Microeconomics also helps managers understand the
availability and prices of resources that are necessary for the company to create its products and services.

A successful business cannot just create and manufacture a product or provide a service; it must produce a
product or service that customers will purchase. Demand refers to the quantity of a good or service that
consumers are willing and able to purchase at various prices during a given time period, ceteris paribus (a
Latin phrase meaning "all other things being equal").

Let's consider what the demand for pizza might look like. Suppose that at a price of $30 per pizza, no one will
purchase a pizza, but if the price of a pizza is $25, 10 people might buy a pizza. If the price falls even lower,
more pizzas will be purchased, as shown in Table 3.1.

                                              Price ($) Quantity

                                              30                  0

                                              25                  10

                                              20                  20

                                              15                  30

                                              10                  40

                                              5                   50

                                              Table 3.1 Demand
                                              Schedule for Pizza

The information in Table 3.1 can be viewed in the form of a graph, as in Figure 3.2. Economists refer to the line
in Figure 3.2 as a demand curve. When plotting a demand curve, price is placed on the vertical axis, and
quantity is placed on the horizontal axis. Because more pizzas are bought at lower prices than at higher prices,
this demand curve is downward sloping. This inverse relationship is referred to as the law of demand.

Access for free at openstax.org
                     3.1 · Microeconomics 69

                                                                   Figure 3.2 Demand Curve for Pizzas

The inverse relationship between the price of a good and the quantity of a good sold occurs for two reasons.
First, as you consume more and more pizza, the amount of happiness that one more pizza will bring you
diminishes. If you have had nothing to eat all day and you are hungry, you might be more willing to pay a high
price for a pizza, and that pizza will bring you a great deal of satisfaction. However, after your hunger has been
somewhat satisfied, you may not be willing to pay as much for a second pizza. You may only be willing to
purchase a third pizza (to freeze at home) if you can get it at a fairly low price. Second, demand depends not
only on your willingness to pay but also on your ability to pay. If you have limited income, then as the price of
pizza rises, you simply cannot buy as much pizza.

The demand curve is drawn as a relationship between the price of the good and the quantity of the good
purchased. It isolates the relationship between price and quantity demand. A demand curve is drawn
assuming that no relevant factor besides the price of the product is changing. This assumption is, as
mentioned above, ceteris paribus.

If another relevant economic factor changes, the demand curve can change. Relevant economic factors would
include consumer income, the size of the population, the tastes and preferences of consumers, and the price
of other goods. For example, if the price of hamburgers doubled, then families might substitute having a pizza
night for having a hamburger cookout. This would cause the demand for pizzas to increase.

If the demand for pizzas increased, the quantities of pizza purchased at every price level would be higher. The
demand schedule for pizzas might look like Table 3.2 after an increase in the price of hamburgers.

Price ($) Quantity

30  9

25  19

20  29

15  39

10  49

5   59

Table 3.2 Demand
Schedule for Pizzas
after the Price of
Hamburgers Doubles
70 3 · Economic Foundations: Money and Rates

      This change leads to a movement in the demand curve--outward to the right, as shown in Figure 3.3. This is
      known as an increase in demand. Now, at a price of $25, people will purchase 19 pizzas instead of 10; and at a
      price of $15, people will purchase 39 pizzas instead of 30.

                     Figure 3.3 An Increase in Demand Represented as a Movement of the Demand Curve to the Right

A decrease in demand would cause the demand curve to move to the left. This could happen if people's tastes
and preferences changed. If there were, for example, increased publicity about pizza being an unhealthy food
choice, some individuals would choose healthier alternatives and consume less pizza.

 LINK TO LEARNING

 Demand Curve Shifts

  If any of the items that are assumed not to change when a demand curve is drawn do change, then the
  demand curve can shift. To learn more about these changes in demand, watch the MRU video on demand
  curve shifts (https://openstax.org/r/mru-video).

Supply

Supply is the quantity of a good or service that firms are willing to sell at various prices, during a given time
period, ceteris paribus. Table 3.3 is a fictional example of a supply schedule for pizzas. In some cases, higher
prices encourage producers to provide more of their product for sale. Thus, there is a positive relationship
between the price and quantity supplied.

                                 Price ($) Quantity

                                 30                   60

                                 25                   50

                                 20                   40

                                 15                   30

                                 10                   20

                                 5                    10

                                 Table 3.3 Supply
                                 Schedule for Pizzas

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                             3.1 · Microeconomics 71

The data from the supply schedule can be pictured in a graph, as is shown in Figure 3.4. Because a higher price
encourages suppliers to sell more pizzas, the supply curve will be upward sloping.

                                                                    Figure 3.4 Supply Curve for Pizzas

The supply curve isolates the relationship between the price of pizzas and the quantity of pizzas supplied. All
other relevant economic factors are assumed to remain unchanged when the curve is drawn. If a factor such
as the cost of cheese or the salaries paid to workers changes, then the supply curve will move. A shift to the
right indicates that a greater quantity of pizzas will be provided by firms at a particular price; this would
indicate an increase in supply. A decrease in supply would be represented by a shift in the supply curve to the
left.

 LINK TO LEARNING
 Supply Curve Shifts

  The ceteris paribus assumption is made when drawing a supply curve, just as it is when drawing a demand
  curve. If a relevant economic variable other than the price of the good for which the supply curve is drawn
  changes, the supply curve will shift. For more information about how changes in these variables will move
  the supply curve, watch the MRU video on supply curve shifts (https://openstax.org/r/mru-video-on-
  supply).

Equilibrium Price

Demand represents buyers, and supply represents sellers. In the market, these two groups interact to
determine the price of a good and the quantity of the good that is sold. Because both the demand curve and
the supply curve are graphed with price on the vertical axis and quantity on the horizontal axis, these two
curves can be placed in the same graph, as is shown in Figure 3.5.
72 3 · Economic Foundations: Money and Rates

                                        Figure 3.5 Graph of Demand and Supply Showing Equilibrium Price and Quantity

      The point at which the supply and demand curves intersect is known as the equilibrium. At the equilibrium
      price, the quantity demanded will equal exactly the quantity supplied. There is no shortage or surplus of the
      product. In the example shown in Figure 3.5, when the price is $15, consumers want to purchase 30 pizzas and
      sellers want to make 30 pizzas available for purchase. The market is in balance.
      A price higher than the equilibrium price will not be sustainable in a competitive marketplace. If the price of a
      pizza were $20, suppliers would make 40 pizzas available, but the quantity of pizzas demanded would be only
      20 pizzas. This would be a surplus, or excess quantity supplied, of pizzas. Restaurant owners who see that they
      have 40 pizzas to sell but can only sell 20 of those pizzas will lower their prices to encourage more customers
      to purchase pizzas. At the same time, the restaurant owners will cut back on their pizza production. This
      process will drive the pizza price down from $20 toward the equilibrium price.
      The opposite would occur if the price of a pizza were only $5. Customers may want to purchase 50 pizzas, but
      restaurants would only want to sell 10 pizzas at the low price. Quantity demanded would exceed quantity
      supplied. At a price below the equilibrium price, a shortage would occur. Shortages drive prices up toward the
      equilibrium price.

      LINK TO LEARNING
      The Equilibrium Price

        A competitive market will drive prices to equilibrium. For a more in-depth understanding of this process,
        watch the MRU video on equilibrium price and quantity (https://openstax.org/r/mru-video-on-equilibrium).

      THINK IT THROUGH
      Graphing Demand and Supply

        Consider the demand and supply schedules for sweatshirts shown below. Sketch a graph of demand and
        supply, placing quantity on the horizontal axis and price on the vertical axis. What will the equilibrium price
        for sweatshirts be? Table 3.4 provides the demand and supply schedules for the sweatshirts.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         3.1 · Microeconomics 73

Demand Schedule for Sweatshirts Supply Schedule for Sweatshirts

Price ($)      Quantity      Price ($)                     Quantity

           55            0                             55            45

           50            4                             50            40

           45            8                             45            35

           40            12                            40            30

           35            16                            35            25

           30            20                            30            20

           25            24                            25            15

           20            28                            20            10

           15            32                            15            5

           10            36                            10            0

           5             40

Table 3.4 Demand and Supply Schedules for Sweatshirts

Solution:

The demand curve for sweatshirts is the downward-sloping curve in Figure 3.6, showing the inverse
relationship between price and quantity demanded. The upward-sloping curve is the supply curve for
sweatshirts. The equilibrium price will be $30. At a price of $30, the quantity demanded of 20 sweatshirts
equals the quantity supplied of 20 sweatshirts.

                                                    Figure 3.6 Graph of Demand and Supply for Sweatshirts

Changes in Equilibrium Price

A price that is either too high (above the equilibrium price) or too low (below the equilibrium price) is not
sustainable in a competitive market. Market forces pull prices to the equilibrium, where they stay until either
supply or demand changes.
If supply increases and the curve moves outward to the right, as in Figure 3.7, then the equilibrium price will
fall. With the original supply curve, Supply1, the equilibrium price was $15; quantity demanded and quantity
supplied were both 30 pizzas at that price. If a new pizza restaurant opens, increasing the supply of pizzas to
74 3 · Economic Foundations: Money and Rates

Supply2, the equilibrium will move from Equilibrium1  to Equilibrium2 . The new equilibrium price will

be $10. This new equilibrium is associated with a quantity demanded of 40 pizzas and a quantity supplied of 40

pizzas.

Figure 3.7 Supply Curve Changes When Supply Increases An increase in supply leads to a lower equilibrium price and an increase
in quantity demanded.

It is important to note that the demand curve in Figure 3.7 does not move. In other words, demand does not
change. As the equilibrium price falls, consumers move along the demand curve to a point with a combination
of a lower price and a higher quantity. Economists call this movement an increase in quantity demanded.
Distinguishing between an increase in quantity demanded (a movement along the demand curve) and an
increase in demand (a shift in the demand curve) is critical when analyzing market equilibriums.

Equilibrium price will also fall if demand falls. Remember that a decrease in demand is represented as a shift
of the demand curve inward to the left. In Figure 3.8, you can see how a decrease in demand causes a change
from to .

                                                                     Figure 3.8 A Decrease in Demand

At the new equilibrium, , the price of a pizza is $10. The new equilibrium quantity is 20 pizzas. Note that the
supply curve has not moved. Producers moved along their supply curve, producing fewer pizzas as the price
dropped; this is known as a decrease in quantity supplied.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                        3.1 · Microeconomics 75

THINK IT THROUGH

Graphing Demand

Suppose that the demand for sweatshirts in our previous example changes, and the demand schedule
becomes the data shown in Table 3.5.

                  Price ($) Quantity

                  55                18

                  50                22

                  45                26

                  40                30

                  35                34

                  30                38

                  25                42

                  20                46

                  15                50

                  10                54

                  5                 58

                  Table 3.5 Demand
                  Schedule for
                  Sweatshirts

Has the demand for sweatshirts increased or decreased? Show this movement in a graph. What happens to
the equilibrium? What are some reasons you can think of that may have caused this change in demand?

Solution:

This is an increase in demand. At every price, consumers now want to purchase more sweatshirts than they
did before. This is shown in the graph as a movement of the demand curve outward to the right. Both the
equilibrium price and the equilibrium quantity will rise because of this increase in demand. The equilibrium
price will now be $40, and the equilibrium quantity of sweatshirts will be 30. Note that there is not an
increase in supply; the supply curve does not move. There is simply an increase in quantity supplied (see
Figure 3.9).
76 3 · Economic Foundations: Money and Rates

                                                           Figure 3.9 Graph Showing Increase in Sweatshirt Supply

        A change in any of the factors that are assumed to be held constant under the ceteris paribus assumption
        could have caused the demand curve to shift to the right. Perhaps a rise in consumers' incomes led them to
        purchase more clothing, including sweatshirts. Or an unseasonably cool fall could result in more people
        purchasing sweatshirts. If a popular TV personality indicates that their favorite weekend wardrobe consists
        of jeans and a sweatshirt and the tabloids run pictures of the celebrity wearing sweatshirts, the tastes and
        preferences of consumers may change. Another possibility is that the price of sweaters may have risen,
        causing people to substitute sweatshirts for sweaters.

     3.2 Macroeconomics

     Learning Outcomes

      By the end of this section, you will be able to:
        · Define inflation and describe historical trends in inflation.
        · Define unemployment and describe how unemployment is measured.
        · Define gross domestic product and describe historical trends in gross domestic product.

     Inflation

      Macroeconomics looks at the economy as a whole. It focuses on broad issues such as inflation,
      unemployment, and growth of production. When the managers of an automotive company look at the market
      for steel and how the price of steel impacts the company's production costs, they are looking at a
      microeconomic issue. Rather than being concerned about individual markets or products, macroeconomics is
      the branch of economic theory that considers the overall environment in which businesses operate.
      Perhaps you have heard your parents talk about how much they paid for their first automobile. Or maybe you
      have heard your grandparents reminisce about spending a quarter to purchase a Coke. These conversations
      often turn to a discussion of how a dollar just doesn't go as far as it used to. The reason for this is inflation, or
      a general increase in price levels.
      It is not that just the price of an automobile has increased or that the price of a Coke has increased. Over time,
      the prices of many other things, from the salt on your table to college tuition, have increased. Also, you were
      paid a higher hourly wage at your first job than your parents and grandparents were paid; the price of labor
      has risen.
      When economists talk about inflation, they are discussing this phenomenon of the price of many things rising.
      Instead of tracking the price of one particular item, they consider the price of purchasing a basket of goods.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            3.2 · Macroeconomics 77

Inflation means that the purchasing power of currency falls. Whenever there is inflation, a $100 bill will not
purchase as much as it did before.

 LINK TO LEARNING

 CPI Inflation Calculator

  According to the US Bureau of Labor Statistics, $100 in January 1913 had the same purchasing power as
  $1,722.45 in January 2000 and $2,699.20 in January 2021. If you would like to compare the purchasing power
  of a dollar amount in two different time periods, you can use the CPI Inflation Calculator
  (https://openstax.org/r/cpi-inflation-calculator). You can enter a current dollar amount and calculate its
  value in an earlier period. Alternatively, you can calculate the current value of dollar amounts from years
  ago.

How Is Inflation Measured

Each month, the US Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) collects price data and publishes measures of inflation.
The measure most commonly cited is the consumer price index (CPI). The CPI is based on the cost of buying
a fixed basket of goods and services comprising items a typical urban family of four might purchase. The BLS
divides these purchases into eight major categories: food and beverages, housing, apparel, transportation,
medical care, recreation, education and communication, and other goods and services.

Sometimes you will hear a core inflation index being quoted. This index is calculated by excluding volatile
economic variables, such as energy and food prices, from the CPI measure. Energy and food prices can jump
around from month to month because of weather or other short-lived events. A drought can cause food prices
to spike; a temporary rise in gasoline prices can occur as a hurricane approaches the coastline. These types of
shocks are transitory in nature and do not represent underlying economic conditions.

While the CPI and the core inflation index are based on the prices that households pay, the producer price
index (PPI) is based on prices that producers of goods and services pay for their supplies and raw materials.
The PPI captures price changes that occur prior to the retail level. Because it indicates rising costs to
producers, increases in the PPI can foreshadow increases in the CPI.

Both the CPI and the PPI are calculated by the BLS. The Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) also calculates a
measure of inflation known as the GDP deflator. The calculation of the GDP, or gross domestic product,
deflator follows a different approach than that used to calculate the CPI and the PPI. Instead of using a fixed
basket of items and measuring the price change of that fixed basket, the GDP deflator includes all of the
components of the gross domestic product. Prices are taken from a base year and used to calculate what the
GDP would have been in a given year if prices were identical to those in the base year.

 LINK TO LEARNING

 The Billion Prices Project

  Although the concept of inflation as a rise in the general price level is simple, measuring and documenting
  this increase is complicated. The CPI is designed to measure the cost of a market basket of goods that a
  typical urban family purchases. But what the typical family purchases over time changes. As an item in the
  basket becomes more expensive, families tend to substitute and replace the item with similar goods. Also,
  the quality of goods changes over time. Think of how purchases in a typical household have changed over
  the last two decades. Today, few families purchase answering machines, CDs, DVDs, or alarm clocks;
  smartphones have replaced many such products. Smartphones are even used to make purchases for
78 3 · Economic Foundations: Money and Rates

        delivery from an online retailer. Although keeping the items in the market basket constant allows
        economists to focus on price changes, the market basket quickly becomes outdated and does not reflect a
        typical family's purchases.
        In an attempt to provide new measures of inflation that better represent the changing basket of goods
        purchased and the purchasing habits of families, Alberto Cavallo and Roberto Rigobon founded the Billion
        Prices Project. Through this academic initiative at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, prices are
        collected daily from online retailers around the world. The Billion Prices Project website
        (https://openstax.org/r/billion-prices-project) provides measures for inflation using this data as well as
        research papers regarding macroeconomic research.

      Historical Trends in the Inflation Rate
      Inflation, as measured by the CPI for 1947-2020, is displayed in Figure 3.10. The graph shows that for the past
      70 years, inflation has been the norm. Although inflation dipped into negative territory several times, each
      period of negative inflation was short-lived. Also, you will notice that during the 1970s and early 1980s,
      inflation was abnormally high; the inflation rate remained above 5% for approximately a decade. This was also
      the only time period in which the US economy experienced double-digit inflation. By the mid-1980s, inflation
      had fallen below 5%, and it has remained below 5% for much of the past 35 years.

                                         Figure 3.10 Rate of Inflation Measured by the Consumer Price Index, 1947-20202

      The Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers: All Items (CPIAUCSL) is a measure of the average monthly
      change in the price for goods and services paid by urban consumers between any two time periods. It can also
      represent the buying habits of urban consumers. This particular index includes roughly 88% of the total
      population, accounting for wage earners, clerical workers, technical workers, self-employed workers, short-
      term workers, unemployed workers, retirees, and those not in the labor force.
      The CPIs are based on prices for food, clothing, shelter, fuels, transportation fares, service fees (e.g., water and
      sewer service), and sales taxes. Prices are collected monthly from about 4,000 housing units and
      approximately 26,000 retail establishments across 87 urban areas. To calculate the index, price changes are
      averaged with weights representing their importance in the spending of a particular group. The index
      measures price changes (as a percent change) from a predetermined reference date. In addition to the
      original unadjusted index distributed, the BLS also releases a seasonally adjusted index. The unadjusted series
      reflects all factors that may influence a change in prices. However, it can be very useful to look at the

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            3.2 · Macroeconomics 79

seasonally adjusted CPI, which removes the effects of seasonal changes such as weather, the school year,
production cycles, and holidays.
The CPI can be used to recognize periods of inflation and deflation. Significant increases in the CPI within a
short time frame might indicate a period of inflation, and significant decreases in CPI within a short time frame
might indicate a period of deflation. However, because the CPI includes volatile food and oil prices, it might
not be a reliable measure of inflationary and deflationary periods. For more accurate detection, the core CPI,
or CPILFESL (https://openstax.org/r/fred-stlouisfed-org)--the CPIAUCSL minus food and energy--is often
used. When using the CPI, please note that it is not applicable to all consumers and should not be used to
determine relative living costs. Additionally, the CPI is a statistical measure vulnerable to sampling error
because it is based on a sample of prices and not the complete average.

Unemployment

Unemployment is a measure of people who are not working. For the individuals who find themselves without
a job, unemployment causes financial hardship. From a macroeconomics standpoint, unemployment means
that society has labor resources that are not being fully utilized.
Not everyone who is without a job is unemployed. To be considered unemployed, a person must be (1)
jobless, (2) actively seeking work, and (3) able to take a job. The official unemployment rate is the percentage
of the labor force that is unemployed. It is calculated as

Note that the unemployment rate is calculated as the percentage of the labor force that is unemployed, rather
than the percent of the total population. Only those who are currently employed or who meet the definition of
being unemployed are counted in the labor force. In other words, someone who is retired or a stay-at-home
parent and is not seeking employment is not counted as unemployed and is not part of the labor force.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) of the US Department of Labor reports the unemployment rate each
month. These figures are attained through an interview process of 60,000 households conducted by the
Census Bureau. (See Figure 3.11 for a graphic representation of historical trends in unemployment from 1950
to early 2021.)

2 Data from US Bureau of Labor Statistics. "Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers: All Items in US City Average
(CPIAUCSL)." FRED. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, accessed July 7, 2021. https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/CPIAUCSL
80 3 · Economic Foundations: Money and Rates

       Figure 3.11 Historical Trends in the Unemployment Rate by Year, 1950-20213 The unemployment rate represents the number of
       unemployed as a percentage of the labor force. Labor force data are restricted to people 16 years of age and older who currently
       reside in one of the 50 US states or the District of Columbia, who do not reside in institutions (e.g., penal or mental facilities, homes
       for the aged), and who are not on active duty in the US Armed Forces.

      LINK TO LEARNING
      Unemployment around the World

        The World Bank publishes unemployment figures for countries around the world. In 2020, the World Bank
        figures showed that Cambodia had the lowest unemployment rate at 0.3% and that South Africa has the
        highest unemployment rate at 28.7%. To compare the rates in various countries, visit the unemployment
        statistics section (https://openstax.org/r/data-world-bank) of the World Bank website.

     Gross Domestic Product

      Gross domestic product (GDP) is a measure of the size of an economy. A country's GDP is the dollar value of
      all of the final goods and service produced within that country during a year. GDP measures the value of all of
      the automobiles produced, apples grown, heart surgeries performed, students educated, and all other new
      goods and services produced in a current year.
      How Is GDP Measured?
      GDP can be measured by adding up all of the items that are purchased in the economy. Purchases are divided
      into four broad expenditure categories: consumption spending, investment, government spending, and net
      exports. Consumption spending measures the items that households purchase, such as movie theater tickets,
      cups of coffee, and clothing. Consumption expenditure accounts for about two-thirds of the US GDP.4
      Investment spending refers primarily to purchases by businesses. It is important to note that in this context,
     the term investment does not refer to purchasing stocks and bonds or trading financial securities. Instead, the
      term refers to purchasing new capital goods, such as buildings, machinery, and equipment, that will be used
      to produce other goods. Residential housing is also included in the investment-spending category, as are
      inventories. Products that producers make but do not sell this year (and so are not included in consumption

       3 Data from US Bureau of Labor Statistics. "Unemployment Rate (UNRATE)." FRED. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, accessed July
       6, 2021. https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/UNRATE
       4 US Bureau of Economic Analysis. "GDP and the Economy: Advance Estimates for the First Quarter of 2020." Survey of Current
       Business 100, no. 5 (May 2020): 1-11. https://apps.bea.gov/scb/2020/05-may/0520-gdp-economy.htm

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            3.2 · Macroeconomics 81

spending) are included in this year's GDP calculation through the investment component. The investment
spending category is roughly 15% to 18% of the US GDP.
Government spending includes spending by federal, state, and local governments. Federal spending would
include purchases of items such as a new military fighter jet and services such as the work of economists at
the BLS. State governments purchase products such as concrete for a new highway and services such as the
work of state troopers. Local governments purchase a variety of goods and services, such as books for the city
library, playground equipment for the community park, and the services of public school teachers. In the
United States, government spending accounts for nearly 20% of the GDP.
Some items that are produced in the United States are sold to individuals, businesses, or government entities
outside of the United States. For example, a bottle of Tabasco sauce produced in Louisiana may be sold to a
restaurant in Vietnam, or tires produced in Ohio may be sold to an auto producer in Mexico. Because these
items represent production in the United States, these exports should be included in the US GDP. Conversely,
some of the items that US consumers, businesses, and government entities purchase are not produced in the
United States. A family may purchase maple syrup from Canada or a Samsung television that was produced in
South Korea. A business may purchase a Toyota vehicle that was produced in Japan. These items are imported
from other countries and represent production in the country of origin rather than the United States. Because
we already counted these items when adding consumption, investment, and government spending, we must
subtract the value of imports in our GDP calculation. Net exports equals exports from the United States minus
imports from other countries. Including net exports in the GDP calculation adjusts for this international trade.
Historical Trends in GDP
US GDP over the past 70 years is represented by the blue line in Figure 3.12. At the turn of the millennium, the
yearly GDP of the United States was approximately $10 trillion. By 2020, the GDP exceeded $21 trillion,
indicating that the US economy had more than doubled in size in the first 20 years of the 21st century.5
Because GDP is the market value of all goods and services produced, it can increase either because more
goods and services are being produced or because the market value of these goods and services is rising. If
100 cars were produced and sold for $30,000 each, that would contribute $3,000,000 to the GDP. If, instead, the
cars were sold for $33,000 each, the same 100-car production would contribute $3,300,000 to the GDP. The
$300,000 increase in GDP would be due simply to higher prices, or inflation.
Multiplying the current price of goods by the number of goods produced results in what is known as nominal
GDP. In order to determine what the actual increase in production is, nominal GDP must be adjusted for
inflation. This adjustment results in a calculation known as real GDP. To calculate real GDP, the amounts of
goods and services produced are multiplied by the price levels in a base year. Thus, real GDP will rise only if
more goods and services are being produced. The red line in Figure 3.12 represents the real GDP. Although its
growth has not been as large as that of nominal GDP, real GDP has also grown significantly over the past 70
years.

5 "GDP (Current US$): United States." The World Bank. 2020. https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD?locations=US
82 3 · Economic Foundations: Money and Rates

       Figure 3.12 Growth of the US GDP6 Gross domestic product (GDP), the featured measure of US output, is the market value of the
       goods and services produced by labor and property located in the United States. Real gross domestic product is the inflation-
       adjusted value of the goods and services produced by labor and property located in the United States. For more information, see the
       NIPA Handbook: Concepts and Methods of the US National Income and Product Accounts and the US Bureau of Economic Analysis.

      LINK TO LEARNING
      US Bureau of Economic Analysis

        The US Bureau of Economic Analysis, an agency of the Department of Commerce, produces economic
        accounting statistics, including GDP. The agency's economists and statisticians also produce measures of
        state and local economies, foreign trade statistics, and industry data. To learn more about the US Bureau of
        Economic Analysis and how it measures economic activity, visit the BEA website (https://openstax.org/r/
        bea-website). You can find data regarding the GDP and economic growth in your state, as well as
        international trade and industry statistics.

     3.3 Business Cycles and Economic Activity

     Learning Outcomes

      By the end of this section, you will be able to:
        · Outline the stages of the business cycle.
        · Identify recessionary and expansionary periods.

     What Is the Business Cycle?

      Although the US economy has grown significantly over time, as seen in Figure 3.12, the growth has not
      occurred at a constant, consistent pace. At times, the economy has experienced faster-than-average growth,
      and occasionally the economy has experienced negative growth.
      The percentage change in real GDP for each quarter is shown in Figure 3.13. For any quarter in which real GDP
      is growing, the percentage change will be positive. When the growth rate of real GDP is negative, the economy

       6 Data from US Bureau of Economic Analysis. "Gross Domestic Product (GDP)." FRED. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, accessed
       July 27, 2021. https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/GDP

       Access for free at openstax.org
               3.3 · Business Cycles and Economic Activity 83

is shrinking.

                     Figure 3.13 Quarterly Percentage Change in US Real GDP with Shading Representing Recessions7

Figure 3.14 is an illustration of the growth of GDP over time. There has been a definitive long-term upward
trend in GDP, but it has not been in a straight line. Instead, the economy has expanded much like the curve;
periods of quick growth are followed by slower or even negative growth. These alternating growth periods are
known as the business cycle.

                                                        Figure 3.14 Growth of GDP and the Business Cycle

Stages of the Business Cycle

The business cycle consists of a period of economic expansion followed by a period of economic contraction.
During the period of economic expansion, GDP rises. Employment expands as businesses produce more;
conversely, unemployment falls. Other measures of economic growth may include increased new business
starts and new home construction. The economy is said to be "heating up." As the expansion continues,
inflation often becomes a concern.

7 Data from US Bureau of Economic Analysis. "Gross Domestic Product (GDP)." FRED. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, accessed
July 7, 2021. https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/GDP
84 3 · Economic Foundations: Money and Rates

      Fast-paced economic expansion is not sustainable. Eventually, growth slows and unemployment rises. The
      economy has moved from expansion to contraction when this occurs. The point at which the business cycle
     turns from expansion to contraction is known as the peak. The point at which the contraction ends and the
     economy begins to expand again is known as the trough. The length of one business cycle is measured by the
      time from one trough to the trough of the next cycle, as shown in Figure 3.15.

                                                                       Figure 3.15 Stages of the Business Cycle

      Often, the contraction is referred to as a recession. A private think tank, the National Bureau of Economic
      Research (NBER), tracks the business cycle in the United States. The NBER is the entity that officially declares
      recessions in the United States. Historically, a recession was defined as two consecutive quarters of declining
      GDP. Today, the NBER defines a recession in a broader, less precise manner; it will declare a recession when
      there is a significant decline in economic activity that is spread across the economy and lasts for at least a few
      months.8 Measures of real income, employment, industrial production, and wholesale and retail sales are
      considered in addition to real GDP.

      LINK TO LEARNING
      National Bureau of Economic Research

        The National Bureau of Economic Research was founded in 1920 to create measures of economic activity
        that could be used in public policy discussions. It is a private, nonpartisan organization that conducts
        research that is followed by businesses and the public sector. You can find out more about the NBER and
        view many of its research papers by visiting its website (https://openstax.org/r/nber-website).

     Historical Trends

      The NBER has identified business cycle peaks and troughs in data going back to the mid-19th century. Figure
      3.16 lists each of these cycles, denoting the months of peaks and troughs. We see a repetition of the economic
      behavior--an expansion, a peak, a recession, and a trough, followed by yet another expansion, peak,
      recession, and trough. The cycles are events that repeatedly occur in the same order.

       8 National Bureau of Economic Research. "Business Cycle Dating Committee Announcements." July 19, 2021. https://www.nber.org/
       research/business-cycle-dating/business-cycle-dating-committee-announcements

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                            3.3 · Business Cycles and Economic Activity 85

          Figure 3.16 Peak and Trough Months of Historical Business Cycles (source: National Bureau of Economic Research)

However, the cycles are not identical; the lengths of the cycles vary greatly. On average, the contractions have
lasted about 17 months and expansions have lasted about 41 months. The typical business cycle has been
about 4.5 years long.
At the time of this writing, the United States is in an economic recession.9 The previous trough was in June
2009. From the summer of 2009 through February 2020, the US economy was in the expansionary phase of the
business cycle. This expansion peaked in February 2020, when the economy fell into a contractionary period
associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. This 128-month expansion is the longest expansion in US history.
Only two other expansions have lasted for over 100 months: the 120-month expansion that ran through the
1990s and the 106-month expansion that ran during the 1960s. The longest recessionary period on record is
the 65-month recession that occurred during the 1870s. The recession that began in 1929 was the second-
longest recession in US history. At 43 months long, this recession that ended in 1933 was so severe that it has
been called the Great Depression.10

9 National Bureau of Economic Research. "Business Cycle Dating Committee Announcements." July 19, 2021. https://www.nber.org/
research/business-cycle-dating/business-cycle-dating-committee-announcements
86 3 · Economic Foundations: Money and Rates

     3.4 Interest Rates

     Learning Outcomes

      By the end of this section, you will be able to:
        · Explain the relationship between the nominal interest rate and inflation.
        · Calculate the real rate of interest.
        · Explain the relationship between interest rates and risk.

     Market for Loanable Funds

      An interest rate is the rental price of money. The concepts of supply, demand, and equilibrium apply in this
     market just as they do in other markets. This market is referred to as the market for loanable funds.
      In the market for loanable funds, the suppliers of funds are economic entities that currently have a surplus in
      their budget. In other words, they have more income than they currently want to spend; they would like to
      save some of their money and spend it in future time periods. Instead of just putting these savings in a box on
      a shelf for safekeeping until they want to spend it, they can let someone else borrow that money. In essence,
     they are renting that money to someone else, who pays a rental price called the interest rate.
      The suppliers of loanable funds, also known as lenders, are represented by the upward-sloping curve in Figure
      3.17. A higher interest rate will encourage these lenders to supply a larger quantity of loanable funds.
      The demanders of funds in the loanable funds market are economic entities that currently have a deficit in
      their budget. They want to spend more than they currently have in income. For example, a grocery store chain
      that wants to expand into new cities and build new grocery stores will need to spend money on land and
      buildings. The cost of buying the land and buildings exceeds the chain's current income. In the long run, its
      business expansion will be profitable, and it can pay back the money that it has borrowed.
      The downward-sloping curve in Figure 3.17 represents the demanders of loanable funds, also known as
      borrowers. Higher interest rates will be associated with lower quantities demanded of loanable funds. At lower
      interest rates, more borrowers will be interested in borrowing larger quantities of funds because the price of
      renting those funds will be cheaper.

                                                            Figure 3.17 Equilibrium in the Loanable Funds Market

      The equilibrium interest rate is determined by the intersection of the demand and supply curves. At that
      interest rate, the quantity supplied of loanable funds exactly equals the quantity demanded of loanable funds.
      There is no shortage of loanable funds, nor is there any surplus.

       10 National Bureau of Economic Research. "US Business Cycle Expansions and Contractions." Last updated July 19, 2021.
       https://www.nber.org/research/data/us-business-cycle-expansions-and-contractions

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                3.4 · Interest Rates 87

Nominal Interest Rates

The nominal interest rate is the stated, or quoted, interest rate. If you want to borrow money to purchase a
car and the bank quotes an interest rate of 5.5% on a four-year auto loan, the 5.5% is the nominal interest rate.

Or suppose you have $1,000 you would like to place in a savings account. If the bank quotes an interest rate of
6% on its savings accounts, the 6% is a nominal interest rate. This means that if you place your $1,000 in a
savings account for one year, you will receive $60 in interest for the year. At the end of the year, you will have a
balance of $1,060 in your savings account--your original $1,000 plus the $60 in interest that you earned.

Real Interest Rates

Suppose you are deciding between saving your $1,000 for the year and using it to purchase a flat-screen TV.
The advantage of spending the money on the TV today is that you can enjoy watching programs on it over the
next year. The advantage of saving the money is that you will earn 6% nominal interest; in one year, you will
have $1,060 to spend.

If there is a 2% inflation rate, you would expect the TV that costs $1,000 today to cost $1,020 in one year. If you
save the $1,000, you will have $1,060 in one year. You could purchase the TV for $1,020 and have $40 left over;
then you could use the $40 to order pizza to celebrate the first big game you are watching on the new TV.

Your choice comes down to enjoying a TV today or enjoying a TV and $40 in one year. The $40 is your reward
for delaying consumption. It is your real return for saving money. The remaining $20 of the interest you
earned just covered the rate of inflation. This reward for delaying consumption is known as the real interest
rate. The real interest rate is calculated as

The real interest rate, rather than the nominal interest rate, is the true determinant of the cost of borrowing
and the reward for lending. For example, if a business had to pay 15% nominal interest rate in 1980, when the
inflation rate was 12%, the real cost of borrowing for the firm was 3%. The company would have had to pay $15
in interest each year for each $100 it borrowed, but $12 of that was simply compensating the lender for
inflation. In real terms, the business was only paying $3 to borrow $100.

In recent years, a business may have paid 6% interest to borrow money. This nominal rate is half of what it was
in 1980. However, inflation has been much lower. If inflation is 1% and the company pays 6% nominal interest,
that results in a 5% real interest rate. For every $100 the company borrows, it pays $6 in interest; $1 is
compensating for inflation, and the remaining $5 is the real cost of borrowing.

Risk Premiums

As we have discussed interest rates, we have talked about how the interest rate is determined by the demand
and supply of loanable funds. This tells us the underlying interest rate in the economy. You will notice,
however, if you look at the financial news, that there is more than one interest rate in the economy at any
given time.

Figure 3.18 shows the interest rates that three different types of borrowers have paid over the past 20 years.
The bottom line shows the interest rate that the US government paid to borrow money for a three-month
period. This rate is often referred to as the risk-free rate of interest. While theoretically it would be possible for
the US government to default and not pay back those people who have loaned money to it, the chances of that
are occurring are extremely low.

When someone borrows money, they enter into a contract to repay the money and the interest owed.
However, sometimes, certain circumstances arise such that the lender has a difficult time collecting the
money, even though the lender has the legal right to the money. For example, if a company goes bankrupt
after borrowing the money and before paying back the loan, the lender may not be able to collect what is due.
The chance that the lender may not be able to collect all of the money due at the time it is due is considered
88 3 · Economic Foundations: Money and Rates

     credit risk. Lenders want to be rewarded for taking on this risk, so they charge a premium to borrowers who
      are higher risk.
      Companies are more likely to go bankrupt and not be able to pay their bills on time than is the US
      government. So, corporations have to pay a higher interest rate than the US government. If a lender can earn
      1% lending to the US government, the lender will only be willing to lend to the riskier corporation if they can
      earn more than 1%. In Figure 3.18, the interest rates paid by very creditworthy companies is shown. The prime
      rate is the interest rate that banks charge their very best customers--large companies that are financially very
      strong and have a very low risk of default.
      It is generally riskier for a lender to make a loan to an individual than to a corporation. Individuals are more
      likely to become ill, lose their job, or experience some other financial setback that makes it difficult for them to
      repay their loans. In Figure 3.18, the interest rate on credit card loans is much higher than the interest rate
      charged to corporate borrowers. That is because credit card loans are a high risk to the lender. Unlike other
      loans made to an individual, such as a car loan, the credit card company has no collateral if a consumer cannot
      pay back the loan. With car loans, if the borrower fails to repay the borrowed money, the lender can repossess
      the automobile and sell it to recoup some of the money it is owed. If you use a credit card to buy groceries and
      do not repay the loan, the credit card company cannot repossess the groceries that you purchased. Therefore,
      credit card loans have notoriously high interest rates to compensate the lender for the high risk.

       Figure 3.18 Interest Rate on US Treasury Bills and Credit Cards11 This graph shows the rates posted by a majority of top 25 (by
       assets in domestic offices) insured US-chartered commercial banks. The prime rate is one of several base rates used by banks to
       price short-term business loans. For further information regarding Treasury constant maturity data, please refer to the Board of
       Governors and the Treasury.

       11 Data from Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US). "Bank Prime Loan Rate (DPRIME)." FRED. Federal Reserve
       Bank of St. Louis, accessed July 8, 2021. https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/DPRIME; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
       (US). "3-Month Treasury Constant Maturity Rate (DGS3MO)." FRED. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, accessed July 8, 2021.
       https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/DGS3MO; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US). "Commercial Bank Interest Rate
       on Credit Card Plans, All Accounts (TERMCBCCALLNS)." FRED. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, accessed July 8, 2021.
       https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/TERMCBCCALLNS

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                  3.5 · Foreign Exchange Rates 89

 3.5 Foreign Exchange Rates

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Explain what it means for a currency to appreciate or depreciate.
  · Define spot exchange rate.
  · Explain the risks involved in translation exposure.

Spot Exchange Rate

An exchange rate is simply the price of a currency. If you live in the United States and are going on a trip to
Mexico, you will need pesos to pay for your food, hotel, and other items. You will need to purchase pesos.
Suppose that you go to your bank to purchase pesos. Suppose the bank tells you that it will cost $0.0625 to
purchase one Mexican peso. If you want to take 10,000 Mexican pesos with you on your trip, it will cost you
$625 to purchase the desired pesos.
In this example, the price of one peso is six and one-quarter cents. This price will often be written in the form
of

MXN is an abbreviation for the Mexican peso, and USD is an abbreviation for the US dollar. This price is known
as a currency exchange rate, or the rate at which you can exchange one currency for another currency.
Because this is the price you would pay to purchase Mexican pesos right now, it is known as the spot
exchange rate.
If you know the price of Mexican pesos in dollars, you can easily find the price of US dollars in Mexican pesos.
Simply divide both sides of the equation by 0.0625, or the price of a peso:

If you have Mexican pesos and you want to exchange them for dollars, you will be using the pesos to buy
dollars. Each US dollar will cost you MXN 16.

 LINK TO LEARNING

 Currency Conversion

  Do you want to know how many British pounds your $100 would buy? Or would you like to see how much
  that 10,000-yen-per-night hotel room will cost you in your home currency? You can enter the amount of one
  currency in the MSN Money currency converter (https://openstax.org/r/currencyconverter) to see what the
  equivalent amount is in another currency.

Currency Appreciation

Just as the price of gasoline changes, resulting in it costing more to purchase gasoline on some visits to the
gas station than on other visits, the price of a currency also changes. Currency appreciation occurs when it
costs more to purchase a currency than it did before.
If the next time you go to the bank to purchase pesos, the bank quotes an exchange rate of

                                , it means that it now costs $0.0800 (up from $0.0625) to purchase a Mexican peso.
Hence, the price of a peso has risen, or the peso has appreciated.
90 3 · Economic Foundations: Money and Rates

Currency prices are determined in the marketplace through the same types of supply-and-demand forces we
discussed earlier in this chapter. What would cause the peso to appreciate? Either an increase in the demand
for pesos or a decrease in the supply of pesos.

Currency Depreciation

Just as a currency can appreciate, it can depreciate. If the quote at the bank was                 , it

would only cost $0.0500 to purchase a Mexican peso. When it costs fewer dollars to purchase a peso, the peso

has depreciated. Either a decrease in demand for pesos or an increase in supply of pesos will cause the peso to

depreciate.

Because an exchange rate is the price of one currency expressed in terms of another currency, if one of the
currencies depreciates, the other currency must, by definition, appreciate. If it costs $0.0500 to purchase a
Mexican peso, the price of a US dollar, in terms of a Mexican peso would be calculated as

So, the price of one US dollar would be 20 Mexican pesos.

Exchange Rate Risk

Businesses that engage in international business face currency exchange rate risk. As exchange rates change,

a business can be impacted in a number of ways. One of these risks, transaction exposure, is the risk that the

value of a business's expected receipts or expenses will change as a result of a change in currency exchange

rates. A pottery-making business that has sold merchandise to a company in the United States for $20,000, for

example, will need to exchange the $20,000 for pesos to be able to pay its workers and other expenses in

pesos. How many pesos it will receive for $20,000 will change depending on the exchange rate. If the exchange

rate is             , the company will receive 320,000 pesos for the $20,000. If the exchange rate is

             , the company will receive 400,000 pesos for the $20,000. Thus, as the peso depreciates (and

the US dollar appreciates), the same number of dollars will provide more pesos. Conversely, as the peso

appreciates (and the US dollar depreciates), the same number of dollars will provide fewer pesos.

Firms that hold assets in a foreign country also face translation exposure. When a company creates its
financial statements, items are reported using one currency. As foreign exchange rates change, the value of
how items are reported on these financial statements can change. This type of risk is an accounting risk.

Economic exposure is the risk that a change in exchange rates will impact a business's number of customers
and sales. For example, tourists have the option of spending a week-long vacation at a resort in the United
States or in Mexico. As the dollar appreciates, US citizens can exchange their dollars for more pesos, resulting
in their purchasing power going further at a Mexican resort. Because an appreciating dollar also means a
depreciating peso, it would mean that Mexicans who earn pesos will receive fewer dollars when they exchange
their pesos. A Mexican who wants to stay at a $200-per-night hotel in Colorado will need more pesos to pay for
the room when the peso depreciates. The depreciating peso will likely mean that more Mexicans will spend
their vacation week in Mexico, and fewer will vacation in the United States.

Even businesses that do not view themselves as involved in international business can face economic
exposure. The ski lodge in Colorado will find that its customers from Mexico decrease when the dollar
appreciates. Likewise, when the dollar appreciates, some of the ski lodge's US-based customers may choose
instead to visit a resort in Mexico, where their purchasing power is strong.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                 3.6 · Sources and Characteristics of Economic Data 91

 3.6 Sources and Characteristics of Economic Data

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Interpret economic data.
  · Compute the percent change for economic variables.

FRED: Federal Reserve Economic Data

One of the largest sources of economic data is the Federal Reserve Economic Data (FRED) database.12 This
database is maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis and contains more than 765,000 economic
time series. These time series are compiled by the Federal Reserve and come from a number of sources,
including the Bureau of Labor Statistics and the US Census.

 LINK TO LEARNING

 FRED

  Data included in the FRED database is divided into these broad categories:
    · Money, Banking, and Finance
    · Population, Employment, and Labor Markets
    · National Accounts
    · Production and Business Activity
    · Prices
    · International Data
    · US Regional Data
    · Academic Data

  Watch this FRED introduction video (https://openstax.org/r/what-is-fred) to learn more information about
  how to use FRED.

You can find statistics on employment, inflation, exchange rates, gross domestic product, interest rates, and
many other economic variables in the FRED database. Although much of the data is about the US markets,
macroeconomic data from other countries is also available. In addition to being viewable in graphical and text
form on the FRED site, the data is easily downloaded into an Excel spreadsheet for analysis.

 LINK TO LEARNING

 Creating a Stacked Area Graph

  Not only does FRED provide an excellent source for economic data, but it allows users to create custom
  graphs that can be used in presentations and reports. To learn more about how to create these graphs,
  read this article on using stacking (https://openstax.org/r/fred-gdp-stacking). This tutorial provides step-
  by-step instructions for creating a stacked area graph of real GDP and its separate components and a real
  GDP area graph showing the percent that each of these components contributes to the total value of real
  GDP.

12 Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Economic Resources & Data. Accessed October 25, 2021. https://www.stlouisfed.org/
92 3 · Economic Foundations: Money and Rates

     Levels versus Percentage Changes

      The same information can be presented in graphs several different ways. The particular format you choose will
      depend on how you are using the data.
      Figure 3.19 shows the real GDP of Japan for 2010-2020. This chart is created showing the level of real GDP. The
      steep drop in 2020 highlights the economic decline associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. Looking at the
      chart, it is easy to see that after 10 years of a general upward trend, Japan's GDP quickly fell to a level not seen
      in the previous decade as COVID-19 began spreading in early 2020.

                                                     Figure 3.19 Real Gross Domestic Product for Japan, 2010-202013

      The vertical axis in Figure 3.19 is measured in yen. Over the time period shown, the real GDP ranged from 500
      trillion yen to 560 trillion yen. The general trend (until COVID-19) was upward, indicating growth in the
      Japanese economy. However, the growth was not consistent from year to year.
      Figure 3.20 also contains information about Japanese real GDP from 2010 to 2020. This chart measures the
      percent change for each quarter on the vertical axis. It is created using the same underlying data as Figure
      3.19. Figure 3.20 demonstrates a way of highlighting the growth (or contraction) of an economy at a particular
      point in time.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                 3.6 · Sources and Characteristics of Economic Data 93

                                   Figure 3.20 Percent Change for Gross Domestic Product for Japan, 2010-202014

The formula to calculate the percentage change from one quarter to the next is

In the first quarter of 2013, the real GDP for Japan was 522,594.2 billion yen. In the second quarter of 2013, the
real GDP had risen to 527,277.0 billion yen. Thus, the percentage change in real GDP from quarter one to
quarter two was

As long as the percentage change for a quarter is positive, the real GDP in Figure 3.20 will rise; this indicates
that the economy is growing. If the percentage change shown in Figure 3.20 is negative, then real GDP will fall;
this indicates that the economy is contracting. Looking at the percentage change in Figure 3.20 is helpful for
detecting when the economy is growing but the growth is slowing. If the percentage change is positive but
lower than it was for the previous quarter, then GDP is growing, but the growth rate is slowing.

Indexes

An index is created to track the performance of a particular aspect of the economy or the financial markets. An
index helps compare the level of a variable at one point in time relative to another point in time. Indexes are
often used when movement over time is more important than the absolute level of the variable at any one
point in time.
Earlier in this chapter, we looked at the rate of change in the CPI to measure the rate of inflation. In its raw
form, the CPI is an index. Remember that the CPI is a measure of the cost of a market basket of goods. When
the index is created, the total cost of the market basket, whether it is $300 or $950, is irrelevant. What
economists are interested in is the magnitude of the difference in cost of the same market basket at a later
date.
In order to focus on the change over time, a base year is identified. The cost of the market basket in the base

13 Data from JP, Cabinet Office. "Real Gross Domestic Product for Japan (JPNRGDPEXP)." FRED. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,
accessed July 7, 2021. https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/JPNRGDPEXP
14 Data from JP, Cabinet Office. "Real Gross Domestic Product for Japan (JPNRGDPEXP)." FRED. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,
accessed July 7, 2021. https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/JPNRGDPEXP
94 3 · Economic Foundations: Money and Rates

year is given an index level of 100. Let's assume that the market basket costs $300 in the base year. If the same
basket of goods costs $330 the following year, then the index level the following year would be 110. The index
level increases by 10% when the cost of the market basket increases by 10%. This makes it easy to compare
different measures of inflation.

For example, suppose a market basket costs 40,000 yen in the first year and 42,000 yen in the second year. In
the base year, the CPI in Japan would be set at 100; the following year, the index would rise to 105 (because of
the 5% rise in the market basket cost). Comparing the levels of the index in Japan with the index in the United
States allows you to compare inflation trends in the two countries.

Table 3.6 contains the CPI for the United States, Japan, and Switzerland for each decade since 1970. A base year
of 1970 is used for all three countries, so the index level is 100 for all three countries in 1970. You can see that
Japan has experienced virtually no inflation for the last several decades. If the index level remains the same
from one year to the next, there is a zero rate of inflation. Negative rates of inflation, or deflation, would be
associated with a falling index level.

Year United States Switzerland Japan

1970                                          100.0  100.0 100.0

1980                                          212.3  162.3 232.5

1990                                          336.5  226.4 291.2

2000                                          443.5  278.2 322.1

2010                                          561.6  304.3 313.6

2020                                          666.6  302.3 331.8

Table 3.6 CPI Levels for the United States,
Switzerland, and Japan15

Using an index level helps us compare the impact that inflation has had on the cost of living in the three
countries. Prices were rising rapidly in Japan in the 1970s, outpacing price increases in both the United States
and Switzerland. By the mid-1980s, however, price increases in Japan tapered off. Although prices in
Switzerland rose much more slowly in the 1970s, the price level continued to rise over the next couple of
decades. Even though the price increases have followed different patterns in Switzerland and Japan, the
overall price level today is about three times what it was in 1970 in both of those countries. However, the price
level in the United States has continued to rise; today, the price level in the United States is about seven times
higher than it was in in the 1970s.

15 Data from US Bureau of Labor Statistics. "Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers: All Items in US City Average
(CPIAUCNS)." FRED. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, accessed July 31, 2021. https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/CPIAUCNS;
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. "Consumer Price Index: All Items for Switzerland (CHECPIALLMINMEI)."
FRED. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, accessed July 31, 2021. https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/CHECPIALLMINMEI; Organization
for Economic Co-operation and Development. "Consumer Price Index of All Items in Japan (JPNCPIALLMINMEI)." FRED. Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis, accessed July 31, 2021. https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/JPNCPIALLMINMEI

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                  3 · Summary 95

     Summary

3.1 Microeconomics

Microeconomics is the study of individual economic decision makers. In the marketplace, buyers and sellers
come together. The buyers are represented by a downward-sloping demand curve; lower prices are associated
with a larger quantity demanded. The sellers are represented by an upward-sloping supply curve; higher
prices are associated with a large quantity supplied. The point of intersection of the supply and demand curves
determines the equilibrium price and quantity.

3.2 Macroeconomics

Macroeconomics looks at the economy as a whole. It focuses on broad issues such as inflation,
unemployment, and growth of production. The consumer price index is a common measure of inflation.
Unemployment equals the percent of the labor force that is without a job but looking for work. Gross domestic
product is a measure of the growth of production and growth of the economy.

3.3 Business Cycles and Economic Activity

The business cycle is the repeated pattern of the economy experiencing expansion, a peak, contraction, and a
trough. During the expansion, the economy is growing and real GDP is rising. During a contraction, also
known as a recession, the economy is slowing down.

3.4 Interest Rates

The interest rate is the rental price of money. The nominal interest rate is the quoted, or stated, rate of
interest. The real rate of interest equals the nominal interest rate minus the inflation rate. Lenders charge a
risk premium to compensate them for lending to higher-risk borrowers.

3.5 Foreign Exchange Rates

A foreign exchange rate is the price of a currency in terms of another currency. If a currency will purchase
more of a foreign currency than it would previously, the purchasing currency is said to have appreciated. If a
currency will purchase less of a foreign currency than it would previously, the purchasing currency is said to
have depreciated.

3.6 Sources and Characteristics of Economic Data

One of the most comprehensive sources of economic data is the FRED database, maintained by the Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Over 765,000 time series of data are available. In addition to being viewable in
graphical and text form on the FRED site, the data is easily downloaded into an Excel spreadsheet for analysis.

     Key Terms

business cycle a period of economic expansion followed by economic contraction
ceteris paribus holding all other things constant
consumer price index (CPI) a measure of inflation based on the cost of a market basket of goods that a

    typical urban family of four might purchase
core inflation index a measure of inflation that removes food and energy prices from the CPI
demand the quantity of a good or service that consumers are willing and able to purchase during a given

    time period, ceteris paribus
economic exposure the risk that a change in exchange rates will impact a business's sales and number of

    customers
equilibrium the point at which the demand and supply curves for a good or service intersect
equilibrium price the price at which quantity demanded equals quantity supplied
expansion the part of the business cycle in which GDP is growing
96 3 · CFA Institute

GDP deflator a measure of inflation tracked by the Bureau of Economic Analysis, intended to measure what
    GDP would be if prices did not change from one year to the next

gross domestic product (GDP) the market value of all goods and services produced within an economy
    during a year

inflation a general increase in prices
law of demand the principle that the quantity of purchases varies inversely with price; the higher the price,

    the lower the quantity
macroeconomics the study of the economy as a whole, focusing on unemployment, inflation, and total

    output
microeconomics the study of the economy at the individual level, focusing on how individuals and

    businesses choose to allocate scarce resources
nominal interest rate the quoted or stated interest rate
producer price index (PPI) a measure of the prices that producers of goods and services pay for their

    supplies and raw materials
real interest rate the nominal interest rate minus the rate of inflation
recession the part of the business cycle characterized by contraction
spot exchange rate the price to immediately buy one currency in terms of another currency
supply the quantity of a good or service that firms are willing to sell in the market during a given time

    period, ceteris paribus
transaction exposure the risk that the value of a business's expected receipts or expenses will change as a

    result of a change in currency exchange rates
translation exposure the risk that a change in exchange rates will impact the financial statements of a

    company
unemployed members of the labor force who are not currently working but are actively seeking a job

     CFA Institute

This chapter supports some of the Learning Outcome Statements (LOS) in this CFA® Level I Study Session
(https://openstax.org/r/cfa-study-session-4-economics). Reference with permission of CFA Institute.

     Multiple Choice

 1. Demand is the _______________.
      a. amount of a good or service that consumers need
      b. amount of a good or service that consumers want to purchase at the equilibrium price
       c. quantity of a good or service that consumers want to purchase minus the amount that producers are
           currently supplying
      d. quantity of a good or service that consumers are willing to purchase at various prices over a given
           time period, ceteris paribus

 2. An increase in supply will lead to _______________.
      a. a lower equilibrium price and a lower equilibrium quantity
      b. a higher equilibrium price and a lower equilibrium quantity
       c. a higher equilibrium price and a higher equilibrium quantity
      d. a lower equilibrium price and a higher equilibrium quantity

 3. An increase in the price of a basket of goods is known as _______________.
      a. inflation
      b. falling GDP
       c. rising GDP

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         3 · Multiple Choice 97

      d. a change in quantity demanded

 4. The unemployment rate equals _______________.
      a. the number of people unemployed divided by the labor force
      b. the number of people seeking work divided by the adult population
       c. the number of people unemployed divided by the number of people employed
      d. the number of people unemployed plus the number of people working part-time divided by the adult
           population

 5. To be considered unemployed, an individual must be _______________.
      a. out of work
      b. actively seeking a job
       c. able to work
      d. All of the above

 6. When measuring GDP, purchases are divided into the four broad categories of _______________.
      a. interest rates, inflation, unemployment, and investment
      b. demand, inflation, interest rates, and government spending
       c. imports, exports, loanable funds, and government spending
      d. consumer spending, investment, government spending, and net exports

 7. A business cycle is measured from _______________.
      a. one peak to the next trough
      b. one trough to the next trough
       c. one trough to the next peak
      d. the time of the highest unemployment rate to the time of the lowest unemployment rate

 8. Which of the following economic environments would most likely be associated with a recession?
      a. Unemployment falling to 30-year low
      b. GDP growing at an annual rate of 4.2%
       c. Unemployment increasing from 5% to 9% during the year
      d. New businesses opening in record numbers while new housing starts reach a 10-year high

 9. The interest rate is the _______________.
      a. rental cost of money
      b. increase in the price of a market basket of goods
       c. measure of economic activity
      d. speed at which the money supply is increasing

10. If the nominal interest rate is 9% and the rate of inflation is 2%, the real rate of interest is approximately
      _______________.
       a.
      b. 7%
       c. 11%
      d. 18%

11. A foreign exchange rate is _______________.
       a. the rate of inflation in a foreign country
      b. the amount of imports a country has relative to its exports
       c. the price of one currency in terms of another currency
98 3 · Review Questions

      d. the rate of unemployment in one country compared to the rate in another country

12. In 2020, the CPI in a country is 120. In 2021, the CPI in the same country is 126. This would mean that
      inflation is _______________.
       a. 5%
      b. 6%
       c. 26%
      d. 46%

Review Questions

1. Explain the difference between an increase in demand and an increase in quantity demanded.

2. You see that price of laptop computers is falling at the same time that the quantity of laptop computers is
    rising. Would you attribute this to a change in supply or a change in demand for computers? Explain.

3. Outline the stages of the business cycle.

4. Use a graph of the supply of loanable funds and demand for loanable funds to explain what will happen if
    the Federal Reserve increases the money supply. What would you expect to happen to the interest rate
    when this occurs?

5. Your bank offers you a car loan with an interest rate of 6%. You expect inflation to be 2%. What is the real
    interest rate on this loan?

6. You see that First National Bank is willing to make you a four-year $40,000 car loan with an interest rate of
    4.2%. However, the same bank will charge you 16.5% interest on a credit card that it issues. Why is the
    interest rate on the credit card so much higher than the interest rate on the car loan?

7. Last year, the exchange rate between the Korean won and the US dollar was                   . This

year, the exchange rate is                    . Has the Korean won appreciated or depreciated over the

past year? Explain.

Problems

1. You are planning a budget for an upcoming trip to Japan. Your hotel will cost 12,000 yen per night, and you

will stay in the hotel for six nights. If the current exchange rate is        , how much will the

hotel stay cost you in US dollars?

2. Visit the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis's FRED site. Create a graph that plots the unemployment rate
    for men and the unemployment rate for women since 1948. Turn recession shading on so that you can tell
    when recession occurred. Are there any patterns that you detect when looking at your chart?

     Video Activity

Should Investors Prepare for Inflation or Hyperinflation?

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/inflation-or-hyper-inflation)
Inflation is a general increase in the price level. If inflation is extremely high, hyperinflation is said to exist. The
video Should Investors Prepare for Inflation or Hyperinflation? by TD Ameritrade explores economic
conditions that existed in the spring of 2021 that led some economists to be concerned that investors should
be preparing for high inflation.

 1. How might the Federal Reserve's response to the economic conditions that existed in the wake of the
     COVID-19 pandemic lead to a higher rate of inflation than the United States has experienced over the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            3 · Video Activity 99

     previous few decades?

 2. What suggestions does the video provide to investors who want to protect the value of their savings from
     being negatively impacted by inflation? Do some research to find out how much inflation has occurred
     since the spring of 2021 and how an investor who followed the advice would have fared.

Unemployment Explained

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/unemployment-explained)
The video Unemployment Explained, produced by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), explores how
economists think about unemployment. The basic economic tools of supply and demand are used to explain
what causes unemployment. In this video, you will also learn about how economists categorize different types
of unemployment and why a zero rate of unemployment is not likely or even desirable.

 3. List the types of unemployment presented in the video, giving an example of each type.

 4. Choose three countries and find out what unemployment has been in each of those countries over the
     past decade. Do you detect any patterns in the unemployment rates in those countries over time or across
     the three different countries? Tell which type of unemployment you think has been most prevalent in each
     country, and explain your reasoning.
100 3 · Video Activity
Access for free at openstax.org
4 · Why It Matters                                                                                                                  101

 4
              Accrual Accounting Process

Figure 4.1 Accrual accounting reports revenue when goods are delivered or services are performed but are not necessarily paid for.
(credit: modification of work "Reviewing Financial Statements" by Instructional Institutions)

Chapter Outline

  4.1 Cash versus Accrual Accounting
  4.2 Economic Basis for Accrual Accounting
  4.3 How Does a Company Recognize a Sale and an Expense?
  4.4 When Should a Company Capitalize or Expense an Item?
  4.5 What Is "Profit" versus "Loss" for the Company?

      Why It Matters

Emma, an accounting major, was on her way to her Wednesday morning accounting class with her friend Sam.
Sam, a finance major, kept complaining to Emma that he didn't enjoy their accounting class at all. "Why do we
have to spend so much time worried about debits, credits, accounts, and all this other accounting jargon
anyway? I'm a finance major. I won't be spending my days recording entries and counting pennies. I'm
dreading class today. I looked at the syllabus, we're studying the accrual method. So what? Just give me the
financial statements so I have the data I need."

Emma smiled at her friend and thought for a moment before responding. Emma loves the details of debits,
credits, and "all that other accounting jargon," as Sam put it. She knows that while not everyone enjoys the
details or understands them, they do play a big role in the timing and accuracy of financial statements. "Yeah,
yeah, Sam, accounting isn't always easy or fun, but it's important. The financial statements you will use in
finance are a part of the foundation for many decisions. They are an important tool. Even though you don't
have to create financial statements in a finance role, it's still necessary to understand the accounting principles
they are based on. We haven't covered the details yet, but I do know that income or loss in a period can be
significantly different if the income statement is prepared under cash versus accrual methods. I would think
that would be important to know if you are the one using the income statement."
102 4 · Accrual Accounting Process

      4.1 Cash versus Accrual Accounting

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Outline the key concepts of the cash-basis accounting method.
         · Explain the key characteristics of the accrual-basis accounting method.
         · Identify businesses for which cash accounting or accrual accounting is more appropriate.

       In this section, we will explore the basic elements of cash and accrual accounting and the businesses that are
       most likely to use each one. Some private companies may choose to use cash-basis accounting rather than
       accrual-basis accounting to report financial information.

      Cash-Basis Accounting

       In business, cash is certainly important. In fact, it's so important that it dictates one of two ways we can
       account for our business transactions. The cash method is just as the name implies--it records transactions
       only when cash flows. We track cash inflows and outflows as they occur. This method is most commonly used
       by small businesses that deal primarily in cash transactions. The other method, called the accrual method,
       records transactions when they occur, rather than waiting for cash to be accumulated. Using the accrual
       method, we match cash inflows and the outflows required to generate them. We call this the matching
       principle. This method is used by most publicly traded companies. In this chapter, you'll explore both methods,
       see how each impacts financial statements differently, note the role of timing in each method, and learn how
       and when to record capital and expense transactions.

       Let's look at an example. Chris just finished the first month of her landscaping business operations at the end
       of August, and she used the cash method of accounting to figure out her net income. Most small start-up
       companies use the cash method of accounting because it is easy to understand, requires no special training,
       and helps them focus on one big key to their survival--cash. This means that she simply recorded the cash
       that came in and the cash that went out of her business. She brought in $1,400 in revenue in her first month,
       which she felt was substantial given that it was her first month. But after deducting her expenses, she had only
       $250 left, so she worried about the future of her business. Would she have to increase her sales exponentially
       in order to start bringing in a decent profit each month?

       As you move through the chapter, you'll get to see the impact of the two methods of accounting and how
       these methods impact the insights and decisions Chris made for her new business.

       Cash-basis accounting is a method of accounting in which transactions are not recorded in the financial
       statements until there is an exchange of cash. Cash-basis accounting sometimes impacts the timing of
       revenue and expense reporting until cash receipts or outlays occur. For example, as you saw above, Chris
       measured the performance of her landscaping business for the month of August using cash flows. Cash
       accounting is far simpler to track than accrual-basis accounting.

      Accrual-Basis Accounting

       Public companies reporting their financial positions use either US generally accepted accounting principles
       (GAAP) or International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), as allowed under the Securities and Exchange
       Commission (SEC) regulations. GAAP is a set of accounting standards created by the Financial Accounting
       Standards Board (FASB) and the Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB). It's key to note that
       though they are similar in many areas, there are still key areas that differ between GAAP and IFRS. Therefore,
       when using financial statements, it's important to be aware of the standards under which they were prepared.
       However, public or private companies using GAAP or IFRS must prepare their financial statements using the
       rules of accrual accounting. Accrual-basis accounting prescribes that revenues and expenses must be
       recorded in the accounting period in which they were earned or incurred, no matter when cash receipts or
       payments occur. It is because of accrual accounting that we have the revenue recognition principle and the

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                      4.1 · Cash versus Accrual Accounting 103

expense recognition principle (also known as the matching principle).

The accrual method is considered to better match revenues and expenses and standardizes reporting
information for comparability purposes. Having comparable information is important to external users of
information trying to make investment or lending decisions and to internal users trying to make decisions
about company performance, budgeting, and growth strategies.

Who Uses Each Method?

Cash-basis accounting can be more efficient and well-suited for certain types of businesses, such as farming or
professional services provided by lawyers and doctors. However, the accrual basis of accounting is
theoretically preferable to the cash basis of accounting because it takes into account the timing of the
transactions (when goods and services are provided and when the cash involved in the transactions is
received). Cash can often be received a significant amount of time after the initial transaction. Considering this
amount allows accountants to provide, in a timely manner, relevant and complete information to stakeholders.

There are several reasons accrual-basis accounting is preferred to cash-basis accounting. Accrual-basis
accounting is required by GAAP because it typically provides a better sense of the financial well-being of a
company. Accrual-based accounting information allows management to analyze a company's progress, and
management can use that information to improve their business. Accrual accounting is also used to assist
companies in securing financing because banks will typically require a company to provide accrual-basis
financial income statements. The Internal Revenue Service requires businesses to report using accrual-basis
information when preparing tax returns. In addition, companies with inventory must use accrual-based
accounting for income tax purposes, though there are exceptions to the general rule.

So why might a company use cash-basis accounting? Companies that do not sell stock publicly can use cash-
basis instead of accrual-basis accounting for internal management purposes or because they are exempt from
such requirements in agreements such as a bank loan. Cash-basis accounting is a simpler accounting system
to use than an accrual-basis accounting system when tracking real-time revenues and expenses.

 THINK IT THROUGH

 Cash- or Accrual-Basis Accounting?

  You are a new accountant at a beauty salon. The salon had previously used cash-basis accounting to
  prepare its financial records but is now considering switching to an accrual-basis method. You have been
  tasked with determining if this transition is appropriate.

  When you go through the records, you notice that this transition will greatly impact how the salon reports
  revenues and expenses. The salon will now report some revenues and expenses before it receives or pays
  cash.

  How will this change positively impact its business reporting? How will it negatively impact its business
  reporting? If you were the accountant, would you recommend the salon transition from cash basis to
  accrual basis?

  Solution:

  Accrual accounting creates a more accurate picture of profit or loss, so the salon's owner can have a better
  understanding of its profitability from period to period. However, it can be more work to record under
  accrual accounting. If the salon is small and the profits and costs are easily understood, it might not be
  worth the extra effort to the owner to use accrual-basis accounting. If the salon is seeking ways to better
  understand profits and costs, accrual-basis accounting would be a great choice.
104 4 · Accrual Accounting Process

      4.2 Economic Basis for Accrual Accounting

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Assess the impact of business transactions on cash flow.
         · Define double-entry accounting and explain how it supports the accounting equation.

       How and when we record our transactions can have a significant impact on financial statements, especially the
       income statement (net income). In this section you will explore the impact business transactions have on
       financial statements under each method. In doing so, you'll be introduced to double-entry accounting and
       see how it functions to support the accounting equation.

      Timing of Business Activity versus Cash Flow

       The first financial statement prepared is the income statement, a statement that shows the organization's
       financial performance for a given period of time. We already saw that Chris, who is a sole proprietor, started a
       summer landscaping business on August 1, 2020. She categorized her business as a service entity and used
       the cash-basis method of accounting to record the initial operations for her business. Although Chris was
       using her family's tractor to get her work done, she was responsible for paying for fuel and any maintenance
       costs. So, on August 31, Chris realized she had only $250 in her checking account.
       This balance was lower than expected because she had spent only slightly less ($1,150 for brakes, fuel, and
       insurance) than she earned ($1,400)--leaving a net income of $250. While she would like the checking balance
       to grow each month, she realized that most of the August expenses were infrequent (brakes and insurance)
       and the insurance, in particular, was an unusually large expense. She knew that the checking account balance
       would likely grow more in September because she would earn money from some new customers; she also
       anticipated having fewer expenses.
       This simple landscaping example can be used to discuss the elements of the income statement, which are
       revenues, expenses, gains, and losses for a particular period of time (see Figure 4.2). Together, these
       determine whether the organization has net income (where revenues and gains are greater than expenses
       and losses) or net loss (where expenses and losses are greater than revenues and gains). Revenues, expenses,
       gains, and losses are further defined in the Income Statement provided.

                                                               Figure 4.2 Income Statement for Chris's Landscaping

       The income statement can also be visualized by the formula:

       Let's change this example slightly and assume the $1,000 payment to the insurance company will be paid in

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                           4.2 · Economic Basis for Accrual Accounting 105

September rather than in August. In this case, the ending balance in Chris's checking account would be $1,250,
a result of earning $1,400 and only spending $100 for the brakes on the tractor and $50 for fuel. This stream of
cash flows is an example of cash-basis accounting because it reflects when payments are received and made,
not necessarily the time period that they affect. At the end of this section, you will address accrual accounting,
which does reflect the time period that payments affect.

The Accounting Equation

It may be helpful to think of the accounting equation from a "sources and claims" perspective. Under this
approach, the assets (items owned by the organization) were obtained by incurring liabilities or were provided
by owners. Stated differently, every asset has a claim against it--by creditors and/or owners.

You may recall from mathematics courses that an equation must always be in balance. Therefore, we must
ensure that the two sides of the accounting equation are always equal. We will explore the components of the
accounting equation in more detail shortly. First, we need to examine several underlying concepts that form
the foundation for the accounting equation: the double-entry accounting system, debits and credits, and the
"normal" balance for each account that is part of a formal accounting system.

 THINK IT THROUGH

 The Accounting Equation

  On a sheet of paper, use three columns to create your own accounting equation. In the first column, list all
  the things you own (assets). List only the asset itself; don't worry about any associated liabilities (expenses)
  in that column. In the second column, list any amounts owed (the liabilities). When you are done, total up
  all the assets. Then total up all the liabilities.

  Now, use the accounting equation to calculate the net amount of the asset (equity). To do so, subtract the
  total assets from the total liabilities. This figure makes the accounting equation balance and represents
  equity, or an estimate of your net worth.

  Here is something else to consider: Is it possible to have negative equity? It sure is . . . ask any college
  student who has taken out loans. At first glance there is no asset directly associated with the amount of the
  loan. But is that, in fact, the case? You might ask yourself why you should make an investment in a college
  education--what is the benefit (asset) to going to college? The answer lies in the difference in lifetime
  earnings with a college degree versus without a college degree. This is influenced by many things, including
  the supply and demand of jobs and employees. It is also influenced by the earnings for the type of college
  degree pursued.

  Solution:

  Answers will vary but may include vehicles, clothing, electronics (include cell phones and computer/gaming
  systems), and sports equipment. They may also include money owed on these assets, most likely vehicles
  and perhaps cell phones. In the case of a student loan, there may be a liability with no corresponding asset
  (yet). Responses should be able to evaluate the benefit of investing in college and the wage differential
  between earnings with and without a college degree.

Let's continue our exploration of the accounting equation, focusing on the equity component in particular.
Recall that we defined equity as the net worth of an organization. It is helpful to also think of net worth as the
accounting value of the organization. Recall, too, that revenues (inflows as a result of providing goods and
services) increase the accounting value of the organization. So every dollar of revenue an organization
generates increases the overall value of the organization.
106 4 · Accrual Accounting Process

       Likewise, expenses (outflows as a result of generating revenue) decrease the value of the organization. So
       each dollar of expenses an organization incurs decreases the overall value of the organization. The same
       approach can be taken with the other elements of the financial statements:

         · Gains increase the value (equity) of the organization.
         · Losses decrease the value (equity) of the organization.
         · Investments by owners increase the value (equity) of the organization.
         · Distributions to owners decrease the value (equity) of the organization.
         · Changes in assets and liabilities can either increase or decrease the value (equity) of the organization

             depending on the net result of the transaction.
       Let's look at Chris's Landscaping business again and do the same quick exercise you did with your personal
       finances. If we were to total all of Chris's assets, we would find just one: $250 in cash. She's using the family's
       tractor, but she doesn't own the tractor, so it is not her asset. Her liabilities are currently $0, as she paid cash
       for all the expenses she incurred already. If we total her assets, we get $250. Liabilities total $0. Using the
       accounting equation, we find her equity to currently be $250, or

      Double-Entry Accounting

       Accounting is based on a double-entry accounting system, which requires the following:
         · Each time we record a transaction, we must record a change in at least two different accounts. Having two
             or more accounts change will allow us to keep the accounting equation in balance.
         · Not only will at least two accounts change, but there must also be at least one debit and one credit side
             impacted.
         · The sum of the debits must equal the sum of the credits for each transaction.

       In order for companies to record the myriad of transactions they have each year, there is a need for a simple
       but detailed system. Journals are useful tools to meet this need.
       Debits and Credits
       Each account can be represented visually by splitting the account into left and right sides as shown. The
       graphic representation of a general ledger account is known as a T-account. It is called this because it looks
       like a "T," as you can see with the T-account shown in Figure 4.3.

                                                                                       Figure 4.3 T-Account

       A debit records financial information on the left side of each account. A credit records financial information on
       the right side of an account. One side of each account will increase, and the other side will decrease. The
       ending account balance is found by calculating the difference between debits and credits for each account.
       You will often see the terms debit and credit represented in shorthand, written as DR or dr and CR or cr,
       respectively. Depending on the account type, the sides that increase and decrease may vary. We can illustrate
       each account type and its corresponding debit and credit effects in the form of an expanded equation (see
       Figure 4.4).

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 4.3 · How Does a Company Recognize a Sale and an Expense? 107

                                                              Figure 4.4 Expanded Accounting Equation

As we can see from this expanded accounting equation, Assets accounts increase on the debit side and
decrease on the credit side. This is also true of Dividends and Expenses accounts. Liabilities increase on the
credit side and decrease on the debit side. This is also true of Common Stock and Revenues accounts. This
becomes easier to understand as you become familiar with the normal balance of an account.
The balance sheet is a reflection of the accounting equation (see Figure 4.5). It has two sections, assets in one
section and liabilities and equity in the other section. It's key to note that both assets and liabilities are broken
down on the balance sheet into current and noncurrent classifications in order to provide more detail and
transparency. Current assets are those that are consumed within a year. Assets that will be in use longer than
a year are considered noncurrent. Current liabilities are those that will be due within a year. Noncurrent
liabilities are those that are due more than a year into the future.

Figure 4.5 Graphical Representation of the Accounting Equation Both assets and liabilities are categorized as current and
noncurrent. Also highlighted are the various activities that affect the equity (or net worth) of the business.

Notice each account subcategory (Current Assets and Noncurrent Assets, for example) has an "increase" side
and a "decrease" side. As you may recall, these are called T-accounts, and they are used to analyze
transactions.
The basic components of even the simplest accounting system are accounts and a general ledger. An account
is a record showing increases and decreases to assets, liabilities, and equity--the basic components found in
the accounting equation. Each of these categories, in turn, includes many individual accounts, all of which a
company maintains in its general ledger. A general ledger is a comprehensive listing of all of a company's
accounts with their individual balances.

 4.3 How Does a Company Recognize a Sale and an Expense?

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Explain the revenue recognition principle and how it relates to current and future sales transactions.
  · Explain the expense recognition principle and how it relates to current and future purchase transactions.
  · Assess the role of ethics in revenue and expense recognition.

You've learned the basics of each method as well as the accounting equation and double-entry accounting.
Next, let's turn our attention to when we record transactions, as timing is key.

Revenue Recognition

Revenue is the value of goods and services the organization sold or provided to customers for a given period
of time. In our current example, Chris's landscaping business, the "revenue," or the value of services
108 4 · Accrual Accounting Process

       performed, for the month of August would be $1,400. It is the value Chris received in exchange for the services
       provided to her clients. Likewise, when a business provides goods or services to customers for cash at the time
       of the service or in the future, the business classifies the amount(s) as revenue. Just as the $1,400 revenues
       from a business made Chris's checking account balance increase, revenues increase the value of a business. In
       accounting, revenue recognition involves recording sales or fees earned within the period earned. Just as
       earning wages from a business or summer job reflects the number of hours worked for a given rate of pay or
       payments from clients for services rendered, revenues (and the other terms) are used to indicate the dollar
       value of goods and services provided to customers for a given period of time.

       THINK IT THROUGH

       Coffee Shop Products

         Think about a coffee shop in your area. Identify items the coffee shop sells that would be classified as
         revenues. Remember, revenues for the coffee shop are related to its primary purpose: selling coffee and
         related items. Or, better yet, make a trip to the local coffee shop and get a first-hand experience.
         Solution:
         Many coffee shops earn revenue through multiple revenue streams, including coffee and other specialty
         drinks, food items, gift cards, and merchandise.

      Short-Term Revenue Recognition Examples

       Two brief examples may help illustrate the difference between cash accounting and accrual accounting.
       Assume that a business sells $200 worth of merchandise. In some businesses, there are two ways the
       customers pay: cash and credit (also referred to as "on account"). Cash sales include checks and credit cards
       and are paid at the time of the sale. Credit sales (not to be confused with credit card sales) allow the customer
       to take the merchandise but pay within a specified period of time, usually up to 45 days.
       A cash sale would be recorded in the financial statements under both the cash basis and accrual basis of
       accounting. It makes sense because the customer received the merchandise and paid the business at the
       same time. It is considered two events that occur simultaneously (exchange of merchandise for cash).
       A credit sale, however, would be treated differently under each of these types of accounting. Under the cash
       basis of accounting, a credit sale would not be recorded in the financial statements until the cash is received,
       under terms stipulated by the seller. For example, assume that in the next year of Chris's landscaping
       business, on April 1, she provides $500 worth of services to one of her customers. The sale is made on account,
       with the payment due 45 days later. Under the cash basis of accounting, the revenue would not be recorded
       until May 16, when the cash was received. Under the accrual basis of accounting, this sale would be recorded
       in the financial statements at the time the services were provided, April 1. The reason the sale would be
       recorded is that, under accrual accounting, the business reports that it provided $500 worth of services to its
       customer. The fact that the customers will pay later is viewed as a separate transaction under accrual
       accounting (see Figure 4.6).

        Figure 4.6 Credit versus Cash On the left is a credit sale recorded under the cash basis of accounting. On the right, the same credit
        sale is recorded under the accrual basis of accounting.

       Let's now explore the difference between the cash basis and accrual basis of accounting using an expense.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                    4.3 · How Does a Company Recognize a Sale and an Expense? 109

Assume a business purchases $160 worth of printing supplies from a supplier (vendor). Similar to a sale, a
purchase of merchandise can be paid for at the time of sale using cash (also a check or credit card) or at a later
date (on account). A purchase paid with cash at the time of the sale would be recorded in the financial
statements under both cash basis and accrual basis of accounting. It makes sense because the business
received the printing supplies from the supplier and paid the supplier at the same time. It is considered two
events that occur simultaneously (exchange of merchandise for cash).

If the purchase was made on account (also called a credit purchase), however, the transaction would be
recorded differently under each of these types of accounting. Under the cash basis of accounting, the $160
purchase on account would not be recorded in the financial statements until the cash is paid, as stipulated by
the seller's terms. For example, if the printing supplies were received on July 17 and the payment terms were
15 days, no transaction would be recorded until August 1, when the goods were paid for. Under the accrual
basis of accounting, this purchase would be recorded in the financial statements at the time the business
received the printing supplies from the supplier (July 17). The reason the purchase would be recorded is that
the business reports that it bought $160 worth of printing supplies from its vendors. The fact that the business
will pay later is viewed as a separate issue under accrual accounting. Table 4.1 summarizes these examples
under the different bases of accounting.

     Transaction              Under Cash-Basis Accounting                     Under Accrual-Basis Accounting

$200 sale for cash  Recorded in financial statements at time of          Recorded in financial statements at time
                    sale                                                 of sale
$200 sale on
account             Not recorded in financial statements until           Recorded in financial statements at time
$160 purchase for   cash is received                                     of sale
cash
$160 purchase on    Recorded in financial statements at time of          Recorded in financial statements at time
account             purchase                                             of purchase

                    Not recorded in financial statements until           Recorded in financial statements at time
                    cash is paid                                         of purchase

Table 4.1 How Transactions Are Viewed under Cash and Accrual Accounting

Businesses often sell items for cash as well as on account, where payment terms are extended for a period of
time (for example, 30 to 45 days). Likewise, businesses often purchase items from suppliers (also called
vendors) for cash or, more likely, on account. Under the cash basis of accounting, these transactions would not
be recorded until the cash is exchanged. In contrast, under accrual accounting, the transactions are recorded
when the transaction occurs, regardless of when the cash is received or paid.
110 4 · Accrual Accounting Process

       CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

       Ethics in Revenue Recognition

         Because each industry typically has a different method for recognizing income, revenue recognition is one
         of the most difficult tasks for accountants, as it involves a number of ethical dilemmas related to income
         reporting. To provide an industry-wide approach, Accounting Standards Update No. 2014-09 and other
         related updates were implemented to clarify revenue recognition rules. The American Institute of Certified
         Public Accountants (AICPA) announced that these updates would replace US GAAP's current industry-
         specific revenue recognition practices with a principle-based approach, potentially affecting both day-to-
         day business accounting and the execution of business contracts with customers.1 The AICPA and the
         International Federation of Accountants (IFAC) require professional accountants to act with due care and to
         remain abreast of new accounting rules and methods of accounting for different transactions, including
         revenue recognition.

         The IFAC emphasizes the role of professional accountants working within a business in ensuring the quality
         of financial reporting: "Management is responsible for the financial information produced by the company.
         As such, professional accountants in businesses therefore have the task of defending the quality of financial
         reporting right at the source where the numbers and figures are produced!"2 In accordance with proper
         revenue recognition, accountants do not recognize revenue before it is earned.

       CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

       Gift Card Revenue Recognition

         Gift cards have become an essential part of revenue generation and growth for many businesses. Although
         they are practical for consumers and are a low cost for businesses, navigating revenue recognition
         guidelines can be difficult. Gift cards with expiration dates require that revenue recognition be delayed until
         customer use or expiration. However, most gift cards now have no expiration date. So when do you
         recognize revenue?

         Companies may need to provide an estimation of projected (or deferred) gift card revenue and usage
         during a period based on past experience or industry standards. There are a few rules governing reporting.
         If a company determines that a portion of all the issued gift cards will never be used, it may write this off to
         income. In some states, if a gift card remains unused, in part or in full, the unused portion of the card is
         transferred to the state government. It is considered unclaimed property for the customer, meaning that
         the company cannot keep these funds as revenue because, in this case, they have reverted to the state
         government.

      Expense Recognition

       An expense is a cost associated with providing goods or services to customers. In our opening example, the
       expenses that Chris incurred totaled $1,150 (consisting of $100 for brakes, $50 for fuel, and $1,000 for
       insurance). You might think of expenses as the opposite of revenue, in that expenses reduce Chris's checking
       account balance. Likewise, expenses decrease the value of the business and represent the dollar value of costs
       incurred to provide goods and services to customers for a given period of time.

        1 American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA). "Revenue Recognition." n.d. https://www.aicpa.org/interestareas/frc/
        accountingfinancialreporting/revenuerecognition.html
        2 Len Jui and Jessie Wong. "Roles and Importance of Professional Accountants in Business." China Accounting Journal. October 21,
        2013. https://www.ifac.org/news-events/2013-10/roles-and-importance-professional-accountants-business

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 4.4 · When Should a Company Capitalize or Expense an Item? 111

 THINK IT THROUGH

 Coffee Shop Expenses

  While thinking about or visiting a coffee shop in your area, look around (or visualize) and identify items or
  activities that are the expenses of the coffee shop. Remember, expenses for the coffee shop are related to
  resources consumed while generating revenue from selling coffee and related items. Do not forget about
  any expenses that might not be so obvious--as a general rule, every activity in a business has an associated
  cost.

  Solution:

  Costs of the coffee shop that might be readily observed would include rent, wages for the employees, and
  the cost of the coffee, pastries, and other items/merchandise that may be sold. In addition, costs such as
  utilities, equipment, and cleaning or other supplies might also be readily observable. More obscure costs of
  the coffee shop would include insurance, regulatory costs such as health department licensing, point-of-
  sale/credit card costs, advertising, donations, and payroll costs such as workers' compensation,
  unemployment, and so on. There are also unseen costs, such as aging of the building (if owned by the
  coffee shop) and wear and tear or aging of the equipment.

 4.4 When Should a Company Capitalize or Expense an Item?

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Define the key characteristics of a fixed asset.
  · Explain how the cost of a fixed asset is spread throughout its useful life via depreciation.
  · Assess the impact to net income of expensing versus capitalizing an item.

Assets are items a business owns. For accounting purposes, assets are categorized as current versus long term
and tangible versus intangible. Any asset that is expected to be used by the business for more than one year is
considered a long-term asset. These assets are not intended for resale and are anticipated to help generate
revenue for the business in the future. Some common long-term assets are computers and other office
machines, buildings, vehicles, software, computer code, and copyrights. Although these are all considered
long-term assets, some are tangible and some are intangible.

To better understand the nature of fixed assets, let's get to know Liam and their new business. Liam is excited
to be graduating from their MBA program and looks forward to having more time to pursue their business
venture. During one of their courses, Liam came up with the business idea of creating trendy workout attire.
For their class project, they started silk-screening vintage album cover designs onto tanks, tees, and yoga
pants. They tested the market by selling their wares on campus and were surprised how quickly and how often
they sold out. In fact, sales were high enough that they decided to go into business for themselves. One of
their first decisions involved whether they should continue to pay someone else to silk-screen their designs or
do their own silk-screening. To do their own silk-screening, they would need to invest in a silk screen machine.

Liam will need to analyze the purchase of a silk screen machine to determine the impact on their business in
the short term as well as the long term, including the accounting implications related to the expense of this
machine. Liam knows that over time, the value of the machine will decrease, but they also know that an asset
is supposed to be recorded on the books at its historical cost. They also wonder what costs are considered part
of this asset. Additionally, Liam has learned about the matching principle (expense recognition) but needs to
learn how that relates to a machine that is purchased in one year and used for many years to help generate
revenue. Liam has a lot of information to consider before making this decision.
112 4 · Accrual Accounting Process

      What Is a Fixed Asset?

       An asset is considered a tangible asset when it is an economic resource that has physical substance--it can
       be seen and touched. Tangible assets can be either short term, such as inventory and supplies, or long term,
       such as land, buildings, and equipment. To be considered a long-term tangible asset, the item needs to be
       used in the normal operation of the business for more than one year, be of material value, and not be near the
       end of its useful life, and the company must have no plan to sell the item in the near future. The useful life is
       the time period over which an asset cost is allocated. Long-term tangible assets are known as fixed assets. It's
       also key to note that companies will capitalize a fixed asset if they have material value. A $10 stapler to be
       used in the office, for example, may last for years, but the value of the item is not significant enough to
       warrant capitalizing it.
       Businesses typically need many different types of these assets to meet their objectives. These assets differ
       from the company's products. For example, the computers that Apple, Inc. intends to sell are considered
       inventory (a short-term asset), whereas the computers Apple's employees use for day-to-day operations are
       long-term assets. In Liam's case, the new silk screen machine would be considered a long-term tangible asset
       as they plan to use it over many years to help generate revenue for their business. Long-term tangible assets
       are listed as noncurrent assets on a company's balance sheet. Typically, these assets are listed under the
       category of Property, Plant, and Equipment (PP&E), but they may be referred to as fixed assets or plant assets.
       Apple, Inc. lists a total of $36.766 million in total Property, Plant, and Equipment (net) on its September 2020
       consolidated balance sheet (see Figure 4.7). As shown in the figure, this net total includes land and buildings,
       machinery, equipment and internal-use software, and leasehold improvements, resulting in a gross PP&E of
       $103.526 million--less accumulated depreciation and amortization of $66.760 million--to arrive at the net
       amount of $36.766 million.

        Figure 4.7 Apple's Property, Plant, and Equipment, Net (September 2020, in $ million)3 This report shows the company's
        consolidated financial statement details as of September 30, 2020, and September 30, 2019.

       THINK IT THROUGH

       Classifying Assets and Related Expenditures

         You work at a business consulting firm. Your new colleague, Milan, is helping a client company organize its
         accounting records by types of assets and expenditures. Milan is a bit stumped on how to classify certain
         assets and related expenditures, such as capitalized costs versus expenses. They have given you the
         following list and asked for your help to sort through it. Help your colleague classify the expenditures as
         either capitalized or expensed, and note which assets are property, plant, and equipment.
         Expenditures:

           · Normal repair and maintenance on the manufacturing facility
           · Cost of taxes on new equipment used in business operations
           · Shipping costs on new equipment used in business operations
           · Cost of a minor repair on existing equipment used in business operations
         Assets:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 4.4 · When Should a Company Capitalize or Expense an Item? 113

    · Land next to the production facility held for use next year as a place to build a warehouse
    · Land held for future resale when the value increases
    · Equipment used in the production process
  Solution:
  Expenditures:
    · Normal repair and maintenance on the manufacturing facility: expensed
    · Cost of taxes on new equipment used in business operations: capitalized
    · Shipping costs on new equipment used in business operations: capitalized
    · Cost of a minor repair on existing equipment used in business operations: expensed
  Assets:
    · Land next to the production facility held for use next year as a place to build a warehouse: property,

        plant, and equipment
    · Land held for future resale when the value increases: investment
    · Equipment used in the production process: property, plant, and equipment

Why are the costs of putting a long-term asset into service capitalized and written off as expenses
(depreciated) over the economic life of the asset? Let's return to Liam's start-up business as an example. Liam
plans to buy a silk screen machine to help create clothing that they will sell. The machine is a long-term asset
because it will be used in the business's daily operation for many years. If the machine costs Liam $5,000 and it
is expected to be used in their business for several years, GAAP require the allocation of the machine's costs
over its useful life, which is the period over which it will produce revenues. Overall, in determining a company's
financial performance, we would not expect that Liam should have an expense of $5,000 this year and $0 in
expenses for this machine for future years in which it is being used. GAAP addressed this through the expense
recognition (matching) principle, which states that expenses should be recorded in the same period with the
revenues that the expense helped create. In Liam's case, the $5,000 for this machine should be allocated over
the years in which it helps to generate revenue for the business. Capitalizing the machine allows this to occur.
As stated previously, to capitalize is to record a long-term asset on the balance sheet and expense its allocated
costs on the income statement over the asset's economic life. Therefore, when Liam purchases the machine,
they will record it as an asset on the financial statements (see journal entry in Figure 4.8).

                                                              Figure 4.8 Journal Entry for Machine/Cash

When capitalizing an asset, the total cost of acquiring the asset is included in the cost of the asset. This
includes additional costs beyond the purchase price, such as shipping costs, taxes, assembly, and legal fees.
For example, if a real estate broker is paid $8,000 as part of a transaction to purchase land for $100,000, the
land would be recorded at a cost of $108,000.
Over time, as the asset is used to generate revenue, Liam will need to depreciate recognize the cost of the
asset.

3 In the Chapter 4 financial statements, a number contained within parentheses is a negative number, such as the "Accumulated
depreciation and amortization" line item.
114 4 · Accrual Accounting Process

      What Is Depreciation?

       When a business purchases a long-term asset (used for more than one year), it classifies the asset based on
       whether the asset is used in the business's operations. If a long-term asset is used in the business's
       operations, it will belong in property, plant, and equipment or intangible assets. In this situation, the asset is
       typically capitalized. Capitalization is the process by which a long-term asset is recorded on the balance sheet
       and its allocated costs are expensed on the income statement over the asset's economic life.
       Long-term assets that are not used in daily operations are typically classified as an investment. For example, if
       a business owns land on which it operates a store, warehouse, factory, or offices, the cost of that land would
       be included in property, plant, and equipment. However, if a business owns a vacant piece of land on which
       the business conducts no operations (and assuming no current or intermediate-term plans for development),
       the land would be considered an investment.
       Depreciation is the process of allocating the cost of a tangible asset over its useful life, or the period of time
       that the business believes it will use the asset to help generate revenue.
       Fundamentals of Depreciation
       As you have learned, when accounting for a long-term fixed asset, we cannot simply record an expense for the
       cost of the asset and record the entire outflow of cash in one accounting period. Like all other assets, when
       you purchase or acquire a long-term asset, it must be recorded at the historical (initial) cost, which includes all
       costs to acquire the asset and put it into use. The initial recording of an asset has two steps:
        1. Record the initial purchase on the date of purchase, which places the asset on the balance sheet (as

             property, plant, and equipment) at cost, and record the amount as notes payable, accounts payable, or an
             outflow of cash.
        2. At the end of the period, make an adjusting entry to recognize the depreciation expense. Depreciation
             expense is the amount of the asset's cost to be recognized, or expensed, in the current period. Companies
             may record depreciation expense incurred annually, quarterly, or monthly.
       Following GAAP and the expense recognition principle, the depreciation expense is recognized over the asset's
       estimated useful life.
       Recording the Initial Asset
       Assets are recorded on the balance sheet at cost, meaning that all costs to purchase the asset and to prepare
       the asset for operation should be included. Costs outside of the purchase price may include shipping, taxes,
       installation, and modifications to the asset.
       The journal entry to record the purchase of a fixed asset (assuming that a note payable, not a short-term
       account payable, is used for financing) is shown in Figure 4.9.

                                                                         Figure 4.9 Journal Entry for Fixed Asset

       Applying this to Liam's silk-screening business, we learn that they purchased their silk screen machine for
       $54,000 by paying $10,000 cash and the remainder in a note payable over five years. The journal entry to
       record the purchase is shown in Figure 4.10.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 4.4 · When Should a Company Capitalize or Expense an Item? 115

                                                           Figure 4.10 Journal Entry for Equipment/Cash

 CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
 Estimating Useful Life and Salvage Value

  Useful life and salvage value are estimates made at the time an asset is placed in service. It is common and
  expected that the estimates are inaccurate due to the uncertainty involved in estimating the future.
  Sometimes, however, a company may attempt to take advantage of estimating salvage value and useful life
  to improve earnings. A larger salvage value and longer useful life decrease annual depreciation expense
  and increase annual net income. An example of this behavior is Waste Management, which was disciplined
  by the SEC in March 2002 for fraudulently altering its estimates to reduce depreciation expense and
  overstate net income by $1.7 billion.4

Components Used in Calculating Depreciation
The expense recognition principle that requires that the cost of the asset be allocated over the asset's useful
life is the process of depreciation. For example, if we buy a delivery truck to use for the next five years, we
would allocate the cost and record depreciation expense across the entire five-year period. The calculation of
the depreciation expense for a period is not based on anticipated changes in the fair-market value of the
asset; instead, the depreciation is based on the allocation of the cost of owning the asset over the period of its
useful life.
The following items are important in determining and recording depreciation:

  · Book value: the asset's original cost less accumulated depreciation.
  · Useful life: the length of time the asset will be productively used within operations.
  · Salvage (residual) value: the price the asset will sell for or be worth as a trade-in when its useful life

      expires. The determination of salvage value can be an inexact science since it requires anticipating what
      will occur in the future. Often, the salvage value is estimated based on past experiences with similar
      assets.
  · Depreciable base (cost): the depreciation expense over the asset's useful life. For example, if we paid
      $50,000 for an asset and anticipate a salvage value of $10,000, the depreciable base is $40,000. We expect
      $40,000 in depreciation over the time period in which the asset was used, and then it would be sold for
      $10,000.
Depreciation records an expense for the value of an asset consumed and removes that portion of the asset
from the balance sheet. The journal entry to record depreciation is shown in Figure 4.11.

4 United States Securities and Exchange Commission. "Waste Management, Inc. Founder and Five Other Former Top Officers Sued
for Massive Earnings Management Fraud." March 26, 2002. https://www.sec.gov/litigation/litreleases/lr17435.htm
116 4 · Accrual Accounting Process

                                                                 Figure 4.11 Journal Entry for Depreciation Expense

       Depreciation expense is a common operating expense that appears on an income statement. It represents the
       amount of expense being recognized in the current period. Accumulated depreciation, on the other hand,
       represents the sum of all depreciation expense recognized to date, or the total of all prior depreciation
       expense for the asset. It is a contra account, meaning it is attached to another account and is used to offset
       the main account balance that records the total depreciation expense for a fixed asset over its life. In this case,
       the asset account stays recorded at the historical value but is offset on the balance sheet by accumulated
       depreciation. Accumulated depreciation is subtracted from the historical cost of the asset on the balance sheet
       to show the asset at book value. Book value is the amount of the asset that has not been allocated to expense
       through depreciation.
       It is important to note, however, that not all long-term assets are depreciated. For example, land is not
       depreciated because depreciation is the allocating of the expense of an asset over its useful life. How can one
       determine a useful life for land? It is assumed that land has an unlimited useful life; therefore, it is not
       depreciated, and it remains on the books at historical cost.
       Once it is determined that depreciation should be accounted for, there are three methods that are most
       commonly used to calculate the allocation of depreciation expense: the straight-line method, the units-of-
       production method, and the double-declining-balance method. A fourth method, the sum-of-the-years-digits
       method, is another accelerated option that has been losing popularity and can be learned in intermediate
       accounting courses. Note that these methods are for accounting and reporting purposes. The IRS allows firms
       to use the same or different methods to depreciate assets in calculating taxable income.

       THINK IT THROUGH

       Fixed Assets

         You work for Georgia-Pacific as an accountant in charge of the fixed assets subsidiary ledger at a
         production and warehouse facility in Pennsylvania. The facility is in the process of updating and replacing
         several asset categories, including warehouse storage units, fork trucks, and equipment on the production
         line. It is your job to keep the information in the fixed assets subsidiary ledger up to date and accurate. You
         need information on original historical cost, estimated useful life, salvage value, depreciation methods, and
         additional capital expenditures. You are excited about the new purchases and upgrades to the facility and
         how they will help the company serve its customers better. However, you have been in your current
         position for only a few years and have never overseen extensive updates, and you realize that you will have
         to gather a lot of information at once to keep the accounting records accurate. You feel overwhelmed and
         take a minute to catch your breath and think through what you need. After a few minutes, you realize that
         you have many people and many resources to work with to tackle this project. Whom will you work with,
         and how will you go about gathering what you need?
         Solution:
         Though answers may vary, common resources would likely include purchasing managers (those actually
         buying the new equipment), maintenance managers (those who will repair and take care of the new
         equipment), and line managers (those in charge of the departments that will use the new equipment). To

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 4.4 · When Should a Company Capitalize or Expense an Item? 117

  gather the information needed, set up short meetings to visit with the individuals involved, walk around to
  see the equipment, and ask questions about functionality, life span, common problems or repairs, and
  more.

Assume that on January 1, Liam bought a silk screen machine for $54,000. Liam pays shipping costs of $1,500
and setup costs of $2,500 and assumes a useful life of five years or 960,000 prints. Based on experience, Liam
anticipates a salvage value of $10,000. Recall that determination of the costs to be depreciated requires
including all costs that prepare the asset for use by the company. Liam's example would include shipping and
setup costs. Any costs for maintaining or repairing the equipment would be treated as regular expenses, so
the total cost would be $58,000, and after allowing for an anticipated salvage value of $10,000 in five years, the
business could take $48,000 in depreciation over the machine's economic life (see Figure 4.12).

                                                         Figure 4.12 Purchase Price and Depreciable Base

Straight-line depreciation is a method of depreciation that evenly splits the depreciable amount across the
useful life of the asset. Therefore, we must determine the yearly depreciation expense by dividing the
depreciable base of $48,000 by the economic life of five years, giving an annual depreciation expense of
$9,600. The journal entries to record the first two years of expenses are shown, along with the balance sheet
information. Here are the journal entry and information for year one (Figure 4.13):

                                   Figure 4.13 Journal Entry for Silk Screen Machine Depreciation Expense, Year 1

After the journal entry in year one, the machine would have a book value of $48,400. This is the original cost of
$58,000 less the accumulated depreciation of $9,600. The journal entry and information for year two are shown
in Figure 4.14.
118 4 · Accrual Accounting Process

Figure 4.14 Journal Entry for Silk Screen Machine Depreciation Expense, Year 2

Liam records an annual depreciation expense of $9,600. Each year, the accumulated depreciation balance
increases by $9,600, and the machine's book value decreases by the same $9,600. At the end of five years, the
asset will have a book value of $10,000, which is calculated by subtracting the accumulated depreciation of

                              from the cost of $58,000.

Units-of-Production Depreciation

Straight-line depreciation is efficient accounting for assets used consistently over their lifetime, but what about
assets that are used with less regularity? The units-of-production depreciation method bases depreciation on
the actual usage of the asset, which is more appropriate when an asset's life is a function of usage instead of
time. For example, this method could account for depreciation of a silk screen machine for which the
depreciable base is $48,000 (as in the straight-line method), but now the number of prints is important.

In our example, the machine will have total depreciation of $48,000 over its useful life of 960,000 prints.

Therefore, we would divide $48,000 by 960,000 prints to get a cost per print of $0.05. If Liam printed 180,000

items in the first year, the depreciation expense would be                      . The

journal entry to record this expense would be the same as with straight-line depreciation: only the dollar

amount would have changed. The presentation of accumulated depreciation and the calculation of the book

value would also be the same. Liam would continue to depreciate the asset until a total of $48,000 in

depreciation was taken after running 960,000 total prints.

THINK IT THROUGH

Deciding on a Depreciation Method

Liam is struggling to determine which deprecation method they should use for their new silk screen
machine. They expect sales to increase over the next five years. They also expect (hope) that in two years
they will need to buy a second silk screen machine to keep up with the demand for products of their
growing company. Which depreciation method makes more sense for Liam: higher expenses in the first few
years or keeping expenses consistent over time? Or would it be better for them to think not in terms of
time, but rather in the usage of the machine?

Double-Declining-Balance Depreciation

The double-declining-balance depreciation method is the most complex of the three methods because it
accounts for both time and usage and takes more expense in the first few years of the asset's life. Double
declining considers time by determining the percentage of depreciation expense that would exist under
straight-line depreciation. To calculate this, divide 100 percent by the estimated life in years. For example, a
five-year asset would be 100/5, or 20 percent a year. A four-year asset would be 100/4, or 25 percent a year.
Next, because assets are typically more efficient and are used more heavily early in their life span, the double-

Access for free at openstax.org
                                       4.4 · When Should a Company Capitalize or Expense an Item? 119

declining method takes usage into account by doubling the straight-line percentage. For a four-year asset,

multiply 25 percent                    , or 50 percent. For a five-year asset, multiply 20 percent

                     , or 40 percent.

One unique feature of the double-declining-balance method is that in the first year, the estimated salvage
value is not subtracted from the total asset cost before calculating the first year's depreciation expense.
Instead, the total cost is multiplied by the calculated percentage. However, depreciation expense is not
permitted to take the book value below the estimated salvage value, as demonstrated in Figure 4.15.

                           Figure 4.15 Depreciation Expense, Accumulated Depreciation, and Book Value, Years 1-5

Notice that in year four, the remaining book value of $12,528 was not multiplied by 40 percent. This is because
the expense would have been $5,011.20, and since we cannot depreciate the asset below the estimated
salvage value of $10,000, the expense cannot exceed $2,528, which is the amount left to depreciate (difference
between the book value of $12,528 and the salvage value of $10,000). Since the asset has been depreciated to
its salvage value at the end of year four, no depreciation can be taken in year five.

In our example, the first year's double-declining-balance depreciation expense would be
                                     . For the remaining years, the double-declining percentage is multiplied by the

remaining book value of the asset. Liam would continue to depreciate the asset until the book value and the
estimated salvage value are the same (in this case, $10,000). The net effect of the differences in straight-line
depreciation versus double-declining-balance depreciation is that under the double-declining-balance method,
the allowable depreciation expenses are greater in the earlier years than those allowed for straight-line
depreciation. However, over the depreciable life of the asset, the total depreciation expense taken will be the
same no matter which method the entity chooses. In the current example, both straight-line and double-
declining-balance depreciation will provide a total depreciation expense of $48,000 over its five-year
depreciable life.

 LINK TO LEARNING

 McDonald's Corporation

  See Form 10-K (https://openstax.org/r/2019-annual-report-pdf) that was filed with the SEC to determine
  which depreciation method McDonald's Corporation used for its long-term assets in 2019.

  Hint: Use the search feature to search for key words in an annual report to find information more quickly.
  For example, search "depreciation." You should find the information you are looking for on page 40 of the
  annual report.

  Based on the company's business model and the industry in which it operates, why do you think
  McDonald's chose this method of depreciating assets? Do you agree with this choice? Why or why not?
120 4 · Accrual Accounting Process

Summary of Depreciation

Table 4.2 and Figure 4.16 compare the three methods discussed. Note that although each time-based
(straight-line and double-declining balance) annual depreciation expense is different, after five years the total
amount depreciated (accumulated depreciation) is the same. This occurs because at the end of the asset's
useful life, it was expected to be worth $10,000: thus, both methods depreciated the asset's value by $48,000
over that time period.

Depreciation                                                 Calculation
   Method

Straight line

Units of
production
Double-
declining
balance

Table 4.2 Three Methods of Calculating Depreciation Expense

               Figure 4.16 Straight-Line Depreciation, Units of Production, Double-Declining Balance Method, Years 1-5

When analyzing depreciation, accountants are required to make a supportable estimate of an asset's useful
life and its salvage value. However, "management teams typically fail to invest either time or attention into
making or periodically revisiting and revising reasonably supportable estimates of asset lives or salvage
values, or the selection of depreciation methods, as prescribed by GAAP."5 This failure is not an ethical
approach to properly accounting for the use of assets.

Accountants need to analyze depreciation of an asset over the entire useful life of the asset. As an asset
supports the cash flow of the organization, expensing its cost needs to be allocated, not just recorded as an
arbitrary calculation. An asset's depreciation may change over its life according to its use. If asset depreciation
is arbitrarily determined, the recorded "gains or losses on the disposition of depreciable property assets seen
in financial statements"6 are not true best estimates. Due to operational changes, the depreciation expense
needs to be periodically reevaluated and adjusted.

Any mischaracterization of asset usage is not proper GAAP and is not proper accrual accounting. Therefore,
"financial statement preparers, as well as their accountants and auditors, should pay more attention to the
quality of depreciation-related estimates and their possible mischaracterization and losses of credits and
charges to operations as disposal gains."7 An accountant should always follow GAAP guidelines and allocate
the expense of an asset according to its usage.

5 Howard B. Levy. "Depreciable Asset Lives: The Forgotten Estimate in GAAP." The CPA Journal. September 2016. cpajournal.com/
2016/09/08/depreciable-asset-lives/
6 Ibid.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            4.5 · What Is "Profit" versus "Loss" for the Company? 121

 CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

 Ethical Considerations: How WorldCom's Improper Capitalization of Costs Almost Shut Down the Internet

  In 2002, telecommunications giant WorldCom filed for the largest Chapter 11 bankruptcy to date, a
  situation resulting from manipulation of its accounting records.8 At the time, WorldCom operated nearly a
  third of the bandwidth of the 20 largest US internet backbone routes, connecting over 3,400 global
  networks that serviced more than 70,000 businesses in 114 countries.9

  WorldCom used a number of accounting gimmicks to defraud investors, mainly including capitalizing costs
  that should have been expensed. Under normal circumstances, this might have been considered just
  another accounting fiasco leading to the end of a company. However, WorldCom controlled a large
  percentage of backbone routes, a major component of the hardware supporting the internet, as even the
  Securities and Exchange Commission recognized. If such an event were to happen today, it could shut
  down international commerce and would be considered a national emergency.10 As demonstrated by
  WorldCom, the unethical behavior of a few accountants could have shut down the world's online
  businesses and international commerce. An accountant's job is fundamental and important: keep
  businesses operating in a transparent fashion.

  (Sources: "WorldCom (UNNET)." Cybertelecom. n.d. http://www.cybertelecom.org/industry/wcom.htm;
  Dennis R. Beresford, Nicholas DeB. Katzenbach, and C. B. Rogers, Jr. "Report of the Special Investigative
  Committee of the Board of Directors of WorldCom, Inc." US Securities and Exchange Commission. March
  31, 2003. https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/723527/000093176303001862/dex991.htm)

 4.5 What Is "Profit" versus "Loss" for the Company?

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Outline the components necessary to calculate profit or loss.
  · Contrast revenue and gains versus expenses and losses.
  · Differentiate revenue and expense versus receipt or payment of cash.

It's a common misconception that if a business has cash they are making a profit, and if they are suffering a
loss they must not have any cash. While this could be true, it's not necessarily true. In this section you'll
explore key differences between cash flow, revenue, expense, profits, and losses.

Calculating Profit and Loss

Net income (net loss) is determined by comparing revenues and expenses. Net income is a result of revenues
(inflows) being greater than expenses (outflows). A net loss occurs when expenses (outflows) are greater than
revenues (inflows). In accounting it is common to present net income in the following format:

Recall that revenue is the value of goods and services a business provides to its customers and increases the
value of the business. Expenses, on the other hand, are the costs of providing the goods and services and
decrease the value of the business. When revenues exceed expenses, companies have net income. This means
the business has been successful at earning revenues, containing expenses, or a combination of both. If, on
the other hand, expenses exceed revenues, companies experience a net loss. This means the business was

7 Ibid.
8 Luisa Beltran. "WorldCom Files Largest Bankruptcy Ever." CNN Money. July 22, 2002. https://money.cnn.com/2002/07/19/news/
worldcom_bankruptcy/
9 Jeff Keefe. Monopoly.com: Will the WorldCom-MCI Merger Tangle the Web? Washington, DC: Economic Policy Institute, 1998.
https://www.epi.org/publication/monopoly-will-the-worldcom-mci-merger-tangle-the-web/
10 Dan Schiller. Bad Deal of the Century: The Worrisome Implications of the WorldCom-MCI Merger. Washington, DC: Economic
Policy Institute, 1998. https://www.epi.org/publication/studies_baddealfull/
122 4 · Accrual Accounting Process

       unsuccessful in earning adequate revenues, sufficiently containing expenses, or a combination of both. While
       businesses work hard to avoid net loss situations, it is not uncommon for a company to sustain a net loss from
       time to time. It is difficult, however, for businesses to remain viable while experiencing net losses over the long
       term.
       Shown as a formula, the net income (loss) function is:

       To be complete, we must also consider the impact of gains and losses. While gains and losses are infrequent in
       a business, it is not uncommon that a business would present a gain and/or loss in its financial statements.
       Recall that gains are similar to revenue and losses are similar to expenses. Therefore, the traditional
       accounting format would be as shown in Figure 4.17.

                                                                                 Figure 4.17 Gains and Losses

       Shown as a formula, the net income (loss) function, including gains and losses, is:

       When assessing a company's net income, it is important to understand the source of the net income.
       Businesses strive to attain "high quality" net income (earnings). High-quality earnings are based on
       sustainable earnings, also called permanent earnings, while relying less on infrequent earnings, also called
       temporary earnings. Recall that revenues represent the ongoing value of goods and services the business
       provides (sells) to its customers, while gains are infrequent and involve items ancillary to the primary purpose
       of the business. For example, assume a bakery sells the truck it uses to deliver wedding cakes and experiences
       a gain on the sale. The bakery is not in the business of buying and selling trucks. It is in the baked goods
       business. Thus, the gain on the sale of the truck would be ancillary to the primary purpose of the business and
       represent a gain rather than revenue. We should use caution if a business attains a significant portion of its
       net income as a result of gains rather than revenues. Likewise, net losses derived as a result of losses should
       be put into the proper perspective due to the infrequent nature of losses. While net losses are undesirable for
       any reason, net losses that result from expenses related to ongoing operations, rather than losses that are
       infrequent, are more concerning for the business.

      Profit versus Cash Flow

       Knowing the difference between the cash basis and accrual basis of accounting is necessary to understand the
       need for the statement of cash flows. Stakeholders need to know the financial performance (as measured by
       the income statement--that is, net income or net loss) and financial position (as measured by the balance
       sheet--that is, assets, liabilities, and owners' equity) of the business. This information is provided in the
       income statement, statement of owner's equity, and balance sheet. However, since these financial statements
       are prepared using accrual accounting, stakeholders do not have a clear picture of the business's cash
       activities. The statement of cash flows solves this inadequacy by specifically focusing on the cash inflows and
       cash outflows. It also helps better delineate the difference between revenues and cash flow in versus expenses
       and cash flow out. As mentioned in prior sections, revenue can occur without cash actually flowing. For

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            4.5 · What Is "Profit" versus "Loss" for the Company? 123

example, a customer may buy a good on account. Revenues would be recorded, but cash would not yet be
received. The same is true on the expenses side. An expense can be incurred, such as an electric bill, but cash
may not have been paid out yet. Thus, an expense is recorded and recognized on the income statement, but
cash has not yet been given up. The statement of cash flows helps reconcile the difference between net
income (a result of recorded revenues and expenses) and actual cash flow.
124 4 · Summary

     Summary

4.1 Cash versus Accrual Accounting

Cash-basis accounting records revenues and expenses only when cash is received or distributed. Accrual-basis
accounting, on the other hand, records revenues and expenses when they are earned or incurred rather than
waiting until cash changes hands. Most publicly traded companies are required by the SEC to use accrual-basis
accounting. Generally, smaller businesses that deal primarily in cash are the best candidates for using the cash
basis since the accrual method more accurately depicts net income or net loss each period.

4.2 Economic Basis for Accrual Accounting

Double-entry accounting means that each time a transaction is recorded, there are at minimum two accounts
impacted by the entry. Each entry's debits must total its credits in order to support and maintain the balance
in the accounting equation. The accounting equation is expressed as

4.3 How Does a Company Recognize a Sale and an Expense?

In accrual accounting, the timing of revenues (when to record them) is governed by the revenue recognition
principle. The principle indicates that revenue is only recognized on the income statement once it is earned.
This means goods or services must have been delivered or rendered. Expenses, on the other hand, are guided
by the expense recognition principle, which dictates that expenses must be recorded in the period in which
they are incurred.

4.4 When Should a Company Capitalize or Expense an Item?

Determining when an item is actually an expense depends on whether it is capitalized (a fixed asset) or not.
Fixed assets are those that are of significant value and last longer than one year. The cost of fixed assets is
capitalized (placed on the balance sheet as an asset) and expensed over the useful life of the asset by
recording depreciation. Depreciation can be calculated using straight-line, double-declining-balance, or units-
of-production methods.

4.5 What Is "Profit" versus "Loss" for the Company?

Profit or loss for a company is calculated by subtracting expenses from revenue. The result is a profit if
revenues are larger than expenses. Profit (or loss) is the money earned from the day-to-day general business
operations. Gains and losses, on the other hand, occur when the business does something they don't normally
do (like sell a piece of their equipment) and earns or loses money on the transaction. It's key to note that the
timing of cash flows can vary from the timing of recording revenues or expenses. Thus a revenue does not
necessarily equal cash in, and an expense does not necessarily equal a cash flow out.

     Key Terms

accounting equation
accrual-basis accounting an accounting system in which revenue is recorded or recognized when earned

    yet not necessarily received, and in which expenses are recorded when legally incurred and not necessarily
    when paid
capitalize the process in which a long-term asset is recorded on the balance sheet and its allocated costs are
    expensed on the income statement over the asset's economic life
cash-basis accounting a method of accounting in which transactions are not recorded in the financial
    statements until there is an exchange of cash
credit a record of financial information on the right side of an account
debit a record of financial information on the left side of each account

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                        4 · Multiple Choice 125

depreciation the process of allocating the costs of a tangible asset over the asset's economic life
double-entry accounting an accounting method that requires the sum of the debits to equal the sum of the

    credits for each transaction
expense a cost associated with providing goods or services
expense recognition (also, matching principle) matches expenses with associated revenues in the period in

    which the revenues were generated
gains increases in organizational value from activities that are "incidental or peripheral" to the primary

    purpose of the business
income statement a financial statement that measures the organization's financial performance for a given

    period of time
long-term asset asset used in the normal, ongoing course of business for more than one year that is not

    intended to be resold
losses decreases in organizational value from activities that are "incidental or peripheral" to the primary

    purpose of the business
net income income earned when revenues and gains are greater than expenses and losses
revenue inflows or other enhancements of assets of an entity or settlements of its liabilities (or a

    combination of both) from delivering or producing goods, rendering services, or other activities that
    constitute the entity's ongoing major or central operations
revenue recognition principle stating that a company must recognize revenue in the period in which it is
    earned; it is not considered earned until a product or service has been provided
T-account a graphic representation of a general ledger account in which each account is visually split into
    left and right sides
tangible asset an asset that has physical substance

     Multiple Choice

 1. Which method of accounting must be used by publicly traded companies?
      a. cash basis
      b. accrual basis
       c. a hybrid of cash and accrual basis
      d. modified accelerated basis

 2. Which two accounting principles directly support the accrual method of accounting?
      a. periodicity, transparency
      b. historical cost, time period
       c. conservativism, going concern
      d. expense recognition, revenue recognition

 3. Which of the following account types has a normal debit balance?
      a. cash
      b. notes payable
       c. wages payable
      d. revenue

 4. Sara sells $100 worth of inventory to her client on credit on January 15. She delivers the inventory to the
     client on January 20. The client pays for the inventory of February 26. On what date should Sara recognize
     the revenue from the sale?
      a. January 15
      b. January 20
       c. January 31
126 4 · Review Questions

      d. February 26

 5. How is the book value of a fixed asset calculated?
      a. original cost less accumulated depreciation
      b. original cost divided by useful life
       c. market value less depreciation expense
      d. depreciable base less market value

 6. Which of the following balance sheet item is classified as a fixed asset?
      a. inventory
      b. goodwill
       c. equipment
      d. accounts receivable

 7. What is the formula to determine net income or net loss?
      a. revenues less expenses
      b. cash less expenses
       c. revenues plus cash
      d. revenues divided by expenses

     Review Questions

 1. Joe runs a small barbershop. Most of his customers pay with cash. He has only a few monthly expenses
     including wages for one employee and utilities. Which method of accounting should Joe use?

 2. Which method of accounting generally provides the most accurate information on organizational
     performance (income or loss)?

 3. Under the accrual basis of accounting, when is an expense recorded?
 4. Describe the basic elements of a T-account.
 5. What is double-entry accounting?
 6. What is the expense recognition principle?
 7. Why is ethics an important concept pertaining to revenue and expense recognition principles?
 8. What is the revenue recognition principle?
 9. What is the difference between a tangible and an intangible fixed asset? List common examples of each.
10. How is the cost of a fixed asset recorded and recognized over time?

     Problems

 1. Padma's Pools Inc. paid $500 for office supplies. What was the impact of this transaction on Padma's cash
     flow?

 2. Sally's BigBox Store issued 1,000 shares of common stock with par value of $10 each and market value of
     $16 each in exchange for a new building. What was the impact of this transaction on Sally's cash flow?

 3. Jose sells $500 worth of merchandise to a client on June 1. He delivers the product and invoices the
     customer on June 10. The customer pays Jose on July 9. What is Jose's revenue for June and July,
     respectively, under the cash and accrual methods of accounting?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          4 · Video Activity 127

 4. Jamal's Car Repair purchases a new piece of equipment with a 10-year useful life for $10,000. What is the
     impact to Jamal's net income in the year of purchase if he expenses the equipment? If he capitalizes it
     using straight-line depreciation?

 5. Mariela's Shop had revenues of $10,000 and expenses of $6,000 and has cash on hand of $5,000. What is
     Mariela's net income or net loss?

     Video Activity

Depreciation Basics! With Journal Entries

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/depreciation-basics)
 1. In what ways do depreciation and capitalization impact the income statement? If you were an investor

     considering investing a large sum of money into a company, what questions would you ask or what
     accounts would you look at to assess the impact to their income statement specifically? How would the
     characteristics of capitalization affect your feelings toward investing in the company?

 2. If a company spends a large sum of cash to invest in equipment or another fixed asset, resulting in a loss
     that year on the income statement if they expense it, have they really experienced a loss? Or have they
     simply traded one asset for another? How does this delineation relate to capitalizing an asset and
     spreading out the cost throughout its useful life? Do you feel the depreciation process is ethical? Or do
     you feel it hides the true cost of business from being fully transparent on the financial statements? Explain
     your answer.

Difference between Cash Flow and Profit

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/difference-cashflow-profit)
 3. When a business incurs an expense (office supplies, utilities, or wages, for example), is their cash flow the

     same in both timing and amount as the expense they recognize?

 4. What are the key components necessary to calculate profit or loss for a business? Are they the same
     elements necessary to calculate cash flow?
128 4 · Video Activity
Access for free at openstax.org
5 · Why It Matters                                                                                                                   129

 5
              Financial Statements

Figure 5.1 Financial statements are needed to understand a firm's financial position and performance. (credit: modification of work
"Drowning by Numbers" by Jorge Franganillo/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline

  5.1 The Income Statement
  5.2 The Balance Sheet
  5.3 The Relationship between the Balance Sheet and the Income Statement
  5.4 The Statement of Owner's Equity
  5.5 The Statement of Cash Flows
  5.6 Operating Cash Flow and Free Cash Flow to the Firm (FCFF)
  5.7 Common-Size Statements
  5.8 Reporting Financial Activity

      Why It Matters

People say that accounting is the "language of business." Using the language of business, accountants are
able to communicate the financial performance and health of a firm via four key financial statements. These
statements are the income statement, balance sheet, statement of owner's equity, and statement of cash
flows. Each statement provides different insights into a firm's performance and financial health. Though some
users may favor one or two statements over another, they are best used together to get a full picture.

In this chapter, you'll be introduced to a firm called Clear Lake Sporting Goods. Clear Lake Sporting Goods is a
small merchandising company (a company that buys finished goods and sells them to consumers) that sells
hunting and fishing gear. It needs financial statements to understand its profitability and current financial
position, manage cash flow, and communicate its finances to outside parties like investors, governing bodies,
and lenders. We will walk through each financial statement, its components, how they are connected, and how
financial statement users understand each one.
130 5 · Financial Statements

      5.1 The Income Statement

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Outline the purpose and importance of the income statement.
         · Identify the structure and key elements of the income statement.
         · Discuss the use of EBITDA as a measure of a company's profit.

       Financial information flows from one financial statement to the next. Thus, the statements are prepared in a
       specific order. The first statement prepared is the income statement.

      Functionality of the Income Statement

       The income statement shows a firm's performance over a specific period of time. The statement helps
       financial statement users understand the sales generated during the period and the expenses incurred to
       generate those sales. If the expenses are smaller than the sales, the net result is profitability, or net income,
       rather than a net loss.

       Breaking the income statement down into smaller pieces provides a more transparent view of the firm's
       performance, allowing users to see more clearly what areas of the business incurred expenses. This is helpful
       to management in driving improvements and to outside users in assessing performance.

      Sales and Gross Profit

       The first section of the income statement begins with sales. Though financial statements are required to follow
       a certain format, account names can differ slightly from one firm to another. You may see the first line, often
       referred to as the top line, called sales, sales revenue, revenue, service revenues, and other similar titles. All of
       these titles are meant to reflect the sales generated by selling product to customers in the day-to-day
       business. On Clear Lake's income statement in Figure 5.2, we see its top line referred to as Sales.

       Income from items that aren't common to the firm's day-to-day business are reported as gains and losses,
       and they are reported further down in the income statement rather than at the top line with its regular, core
       business activities. This is to ensure that anomalies like selling a machine or a loss on retiring a bond don't
       mislead financial statement users as to the general performance of the firm and impact their assumptions of
       future results.

       Firms report their sales and any reductions to sales separately on the income statement. They begin with
       gross sales, which includes all sales to customers. Clear Lake reported gross sales of $105,000 last year and
       $126,000 this year. The next line is sales returns and allowances, which is deducted from gross sales in order to
       find net sales. Clear Lake's sales returns and allowances were $5,000 and $6,000 respectively, leaving the
       company with net sales of $100,000 and $120,000 respectively

       Next, the cost of goods sold (COGS) is deducted from net sales in order to arrive at gross profit. (It is
       customary to refer to sales minus COGS as gross profit because gross margin gross profit/sales.) Cost of
       goods sold includes the costs directly involved in making the product that was sold during the period.
       Common examples of costs included in cost of goods sold include direct labor, direct materials, and the
       overhead assigned to the product in production. For a service business, this would include its direct labor and
       any materials used to deliver its services. For a retail firm like Clear Lake Sporting Goods, this would include
       the costs of all the goods it purchased for resale. Clear Lake's COGS is seen at $50,000 and $60,000 for the
       prior and current years. Note that different types of companies will have different types of costs deducted in
       their Cost of Goods section. Clear Lake Sporting Goods is a retailer, or merchandiser that buys good to resell.
       Their cost of goods includes the cost of goods they purchased to resell. In the link to learning, you will explore
       Apple, a technology manufacturer. Their cost of goods would include the cost to manufacture the goods they

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                        5.1 · The Income Statement 131

sell. Another type of firm is a service firm. A law office, for example, would include primarily the cost of labor in
their cost of services.

Gross profit is a reflection of how profitable the firm's performance was in its core business function. It
includes only the core business and direct costs of performing that business. If the company were a shoe
company, gross profit would show how profitable the company was in simply making the shoes it sold. If it
were a bakery, gross profit would show how profitable the company was in simply baking the goods it sold.
Gross profit shows financial statement users how effective the business is at generating top-line profits on
their core business function. It does not reflect the performance of other areas of the firm such as other
operating costs to support the direct production process, indirect costs, and financing.

For Clear Lake Sporting Goods, we see its gross profit in Figure 5.2. The company earned $50,000 of gross

profit  the prior year and $60,000 in the current year  .

                                                    Figure 5.2 Income Statement through Gross Profit Line

 LINK TO LEARNING

 Gross Profit

  Visit the Apple, Inc. Annual Report (https://openstax.org/r/2020-doc-financial-annual-report) for 2020 and
  locate the income statement (it begins on page 31). Review gross sales, sales returns and allowances, and
  net sales for the last few years. What can you learn about the company's recent performance in the area of
  sales? Is the gross sales line improving? How about the sales returns and allowances line? Has it improved
  or declined or simply changed incrementally with gross sales?

  Review the firm's gross profit for the past few years. Has it improved or declined? Consider the company's
  improvement (or decline) in gross sales as compared to the improvement or decline in gross profit. Does it
  reflect any change in performance over time (earning more or less gross profit on its gross sales)?

Income from Operations

Gross profit is a very helpful measure, but it is only the first of several provided by the income statement. After
gross profit is calculated, other operating expenses are deducted in order to calculate the firm's income from
operations, also commonly called operating income. Common operating costs found in this section include
building rent and utilities, property taxes, wages and salaries, and other overhead costs. In Figure 5.3, we can
see Clear Lake's operating expenses. To sell its hunting and fishing equipment in the current year, Clear Lake
Sporting Goods paid rent for its building ($5,500) and utilities for its retail and warehouse spaces ($2,500);
recorded depreciation on equipment, buildings, and store furnishings (shelves, racks, etc.) ($3,600); and paid
salaries to its indirect employees in accounting, purchasing, and human resources ($5,400). The company's
operating expenses are deducted from gross profit to arrive at operating income

While gross profit reflects only how profitable the firm was in making its core product, operating income
132 5 · Financial Statements

       reflects how profitable the firm's daily operations were as a whole. This still does not include other
       miscellaneous items outside the scope of a firm's normal business. Just as the name implies, it shows income
       from the core operations of the firm.

                  Figure 5.3 Income Statement through Income from Operations

We can see that the company was able to generate                                    more in net sales in the

current year than the prior year. However, it only generated                        in gross profit and

                                 of additional operating income. Further investigation shows that while net sales

increased, so did the direct costs of its goods (COGS) and its operating expenses.

We will further explore how to assess each of these expenses later in the chapter using common-size analysis.

Common-size analysis reflects each element of a financial statement as a percentage of the base. In the case

of the income statement, the base is net sales. Here we would see that COGS was 50 percent of net sales in

both the current                 and prior year               , indicating there wasn't any significant

change in performance we could detect from the information provided in the income statement.

LINK TO LEARNING

Operating Expenses

Visit the Apple, Inc. Annual Report (https://openstax.org/r/2020-doc-financial-annual-report) for 2020 and
locate the company's income statement (the income statement begins on page 31). Review Apple's
operating income for the last few years. Has it improved or declined? Does this fall in line with your
expectations based on your previous review of the company's net sales and gross profit?

Based on the improvement or decline in operating income, review Apple's operating expenses to
investigate. Have any of the operating expenses changed significantly? How did that impact the company's
operating income? What might it tell you about the company's performance?

Net Income

Finally, we move on to net income, or what is commonly referred to as the bottom line. Net income (or loss)
reflects the net impact of all financial transactions for the firm, including those that are caused by events
outside the normal course of business. The most common items deducted from operating income to arrive at
net income include interest expense, gains/losses, and income tax expense. Remember, gains and losses are
those that result from unusual transactions outside the normal course of business. Examples include selling a
piece of old equipment or a loss on retiring debt.

We can see in Figure 5.4 that Clear Lake Sporting Goods has outstanding debt, so it incurred interest expense

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                   5.1 · The Income Statement 133

of $2,000 in the current year and $3,000 the prior year. Since it recorded net income (not a loss), it must also
record income tax expense of $6,000 in the current and $5,000 in the prior year.

                                                      Figure 5.4 Comparative Year-End Income Statement

EBITDA (Earnings before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation, and Amortization)

Now that we have a full income statement, we can look at another commonly used measure of financial
performance called EBITDA. EBITDA stands for earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization.
Amortization is similar to depreciation. It is the spreading of the cost of an intangible asset over the course of
its useful life. Intangible assets are long-term assets that lack physical substance, such as patents and
copyrights.
Since EBITDA removes noncash items from the net income equation, it is considered a useful measure in
assessing the cash flows provided by operating activities. We will assess cash flows using the statement of
cash flows and various other cash flow measures later in this chapter as well.
As shown in Figure 5.5, Clear Lake Sporting Goods' EBITDA in the prior year was
and in the current year was
134 5 · Financial Statements

                                       Figure 5.5 EBITDA (Earnings before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation, and Amortization)

       THINK IT THROUGH
       Net Income

         Visit the Apple, Inc. Annual Report (https://openstax.org/r/2020-doc-financial-annual-report) for 2020 and
         locate the company's income statement (the income statement begins on page 31). Review net income for
         the last few years. Has it improved or declined? Does this fall in line with your expectations based on your
         previous review of the company's operating income?
         Solution:
         Net income improved in the current year over last year but declined from 2018 to 2019 (from $59,531 to
         $55,256). Apple's EBITDA in 2020 was 108.89. (Amounts are in millions.)

      5.2 The Balance Sheet

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Outline the purpose and importance of the balance sheet.
         · Identify the structure and key elements of the balance sheet.

      The Accounting Equation and the Classified Balance Sheet

       Recall that the income statement shows the performance of a firm over the course of time. The classified
       balance sheet shows the financial state of a company as of a specific point in time. It is a key distinction
       between the two statements. The classified balance sheet is prepared in sections that align with the
       accounting equation.
       Remember, the accounting equation reflects the assets (items owned by the organization) and how they
       were obtained (by incurring liabilities or provided by owners). Liabilities are debts owed to other parties.
       Stated differently, every asset has a claim against it--by creditors and/or owners.

       The classified balance sheet is thus broken down into three sections; assets, liabilities, and owner's equity. If

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          5.2 · The Balance Sheet 135

prepared correctly, the total assets on the balance sheet equals the total liabilities and owner's equity sections
of the balance sheet.
The classified balance sheet is considered or termed classified when the assets and liabilities within the
balance sheet are grouped into even smaller sections: current and noncurrent (see Figure 5.6). Both assets
and liabilities are broken down on the balance sheet into current and noncurrent classifications in order to
provide more detail and transparency as well as abide by the convention of reporting in descending order of
liquidity. Current assets are those that can be used or converted to cash within a year. Common examples of
current assets include cash, inventory, accounts receivable, and short-term investments. Assets that will be in
use longer than a year are considered noncurrent. Common examples of noncurrent assets include notes
receivable, machinery and equipment, buildings, and land.
Just as we noted a few key differences in the income statements based on the type of firm, you may also notice
a few slight differences in the balance sheet depending on the firm type. Clear Lake Sporting Goods is a
retailer. Thus, you will see that their inventory for resale on their balance sheet is simply called "Inventory."
This is the goods they have purchased for resale but have not yet sold. A manufacturer, like Apple, Inc. in the
Link to Learning sections, will have a variety of inventory types including raw materials, work in progress, and
finished goods inventory. These represent the various states of the inventory (ready to use, partially complete,
and fully completed product). A service firm, on the other hand, may not have inventory at all. If it does, it may
be simple goods it uses to help deliver its service. For example, a cleaning company may keep an inventory of
cleaning supplies.

Figure 5.6 Graphical Representation of the Accounting Equation Both assets and liabilities are categorized as current and
noncurrent.

Clear Lake Sporting Goods has cash, accounts receivable, inventory, short-term investments, and equipment.
It rents its facilities, so it has no buildings on its balance sheets. Of all its assets, only the equipment is long
term. The assets section for Clear Lake's classified balance sheet is shown in Figure 5.7.

                                                      Figure 5.7 Assets Section of Classified Balance Sheet

 THINK IT THROUGH
 Current and Noncurrent Assets

  Visit the Apple, Inc. Annual Report (https://openstax.org/r/2020-doc-financial-annual-report) for 2020 and
  locate the company's balance sheet (the balance sheet begins on page 33). What types of current assets
136 5 · Financial Statements

         does the company have? What types of noncurrent assets does it have? How has the total of each type of
         asset changed over time?
         Solution:
         Apple reports cash and cash equivalents, marketable securities, accounts receivable, inventories, vendor
         non-trade receivables, and "other" current assets on its balance sheet. The company's current assets
         decreased from $162,819 in 2019 to $143,713 in 2020. Apple reports marketable securities, property, plant
         and equipment, and other noncurrent assets in the noncurrent asset section of its balance sheet. The
         company's noncurrent assets increased from $175,697 in 2019 to $180,175 in 2020. (Amounts are in
         millions.)

       We've covered the assets side of the accounting equation; now let's turn our attention to the other side of the
       equation and the other two sections of the balance sheet: liabilities and equity. Just like the assets section, the
       liabilities section is broken down between current and noncurrent. Current liabilities are those that will be
       due within a year. Common examples of current liabilities include accounts payable, wages payable, and
       unearned revenue. Noncurrent liabilities are those that are due more than a year into the future. Notes
       payable is a common noncurrent liability.
       Clear Lake Sporting Goods has accounts payable and has collected payments from a few customers that it
       hasn't yet shipped its product to (unearned revenue). It also owes money on a note payable. Its accounts
       payable and unearned revenue are both current liabilities. The note payable is not due for several years, thus
       making it a noncurrent liability (see Figure 5.8).

                                                              Figure 5.8 Liability Section of Classified Balance Sheet

       THINK IT THROUGH
       Current and Noncurrent Liabilities

         Visit the Apple, Inc. Annual Report (https://openstax.org/r/2020-doc-financial-annual-report) for 2020 and
         locate its balance sheet (the balance sheet begins on page 33). What types of current and noncurrent
         liabilities does the company have? How has the total of each type of liability changed over time?
         Solution:
         Apple has accounts payable, deferred revenue, commercial paper, and term debt listed as current liabilities.
         Its current liabilities declined by only a small amount from 2019 to 2020 ($105,718 to $105,392).
         The company has term debt and "other" listed as noncurrent liabilities, which increased from 2019 to 2020
         ($142,310 to $153,157). (Amounts are in millions.)

       The stockholders' equity section of the balance sheet for corporations contains two primary categories of
       accounts. The first is contributed capital, which is funds paid in by owners. The second category is earned

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          5.2 · The Balance Sheet 137

capital, which is funds earned by the corporation as part of business operations. On the balance sheet,
retained earnings is a key component of the earned capital section, while the stock accounts such as common
stock, preferred stock, and additional paid-in capital are the primary components of the contributed capital
section.
Clear Lake Sporting Goods has just one contributed capital account--common stock--and one earned capital
account--retained earnings. The equity section of its balance sheet is shown in Figure 5.9.

                                            Figure 5.9 Stockholders' Equity Section of Classified Balance Sheet

 THINK IT THROUGH

 Assets, Liability, and Equity

  Visit the Apple, Inc. Annual Report (https://openstax.org/r/2020-doc-financial-annual-report) for 2020 and
  locate the company's balance sheet (the balance sheet begins on page 33). What is the amount of the
  company's total assets for the most recent year? What is the amount of its total liabilities and equity?
  Solution:
  Apple's total assets for 2020 were $323,888, and its total liabilities and equity were also $323,888. (Amounts
  are in millions.)

Importance of the Balance Sheet

Now that we have gone to all the work to carefully assemble a classified balance sheet, what do we use it for?
The answer lies within the accounting equation itself. Think of the accounting equation from a "sources and
claims" perspective. Under this approach, the assets (items owned by the organization) were obtained by
incurring liabilities or were provided by owners. Stated differently, every asset has a claim against it--by
creditors and/or owners. The balance sheet shows us what the firm has (its assets), who owns them (equity),
and who the firm owes (its liabilities).

Limitations of the Balance Sheet

The balance sheet is indeed a very helpful financial statement, but it also poses challenges. First, assets on the
balance sheet, under generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), are recorded at historical cost.
Historical cost is simply the cost paid for the item at the time it was purchased. Changes in market value of big-
ticket items like land or buildings are not reflected in the balance sheet. Land remains at historical cost, and
depreciable items like buildings are reflected at their current book value (historical cost less accumulated
depreciation). If the asset has appreciated over time, the higher market value of the assets would not be seen
on the balance sheet.
Estimates are another limitation of the balance sheet. Items on the balance sheet such as allowance for
doubtful accounts and allowance for bad debt are based on estimates. The useful lives for calculating
depreciation is another common estimate. If these estimates are incorrect, the net value of the asset can be
under- or overstated.
Another key limitation is the fact that a balance sheet reflects balances at only one given point in time. This
138 5 · Financial Statements

       means that the account value could have been quite different on the day before or the day after the date of
       the balance sheet. For example, if a firm were concerned with certain ratios or investor/lender expectations of
       its cash balance, it could choose to not pay several vendor payments in the last week of December. Thus, on
       December 31, the firm reflects a high cash balance on its balance sheet. However, by the end of the first week
       of January, it has caught up on late vendor payments and again shows a low cash balance.
       Finally, there are many possible things of value that are not recorded on the balance sheet. Internally
       generated assets and the firm's human capital are two common examples. Internally generated assets can be
       anything from a website, a process, to an idea.

      5.3 The Relationship between the Balance Sheet and the Income Statement

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Identify connected elements between the balance sheet and the income statement.
         · Differentiate between expenses and payables.

      Net Income and Retained Earnings

       As mentioned earlier, the financial statements are linked by certain elements and thus must be prepared in a
       certain order. The income statement was first since net income (or loss) is a required figure in preparing the
       balance sheet. During the period close process, all temporary accounts are closed to the income summary
       account, which is then closed to retained earnings. All revenue and expense accounts are closed since they are
       temporary. The net result is either net profit or net loss as the balance in the income summary account.
       Remember that the retained earnings account reflects all income the firm has earned since its inception less
       any dividends paid out to shareholders. Thus the result (net income) of the income statement feeds the
       retained earnings account on the balance sheet. Retained earnings is also an element of the statement of
       stockholders' equity, which we will cover later in this chapter.
       In Figure 5.10, we see net income in the current year of $35,000, which was added to the company's prior year
       retained earnings balance of $15,000. Notice, however, that the prior year balance was $15,000, and the
       current year balance is only $20,000. It does not total $50,000 as we might have expected.
       Remember, retained earnings represents all earnings since inception less any dividends paid out. Clear Lake
       Sporting Goods must have paid out $30,000 in dividends in the current year. We will see this information laid
       out in the statement of retained earnings. In the prior year they began with a $10,000 balance in retained
       earnings. Income of $30,000 increased retained earnings and dividends paid back out to investors reduced
       retained earnings, leaving an ending balance in the prior year of $15,000. This rolls over and is the beginning
       balance for the current year. In the current year Clear Lake had net income of $35,000 and paid $30,000 of
       their earnings out to shareholders, essentially resulting in a $5,000 increase to the retained earnings account.

                                                                      Figure 5.10 Statement of Retained Earnings

       Now we can see the full flow of information from the income statement to the statement of retained earnings
       (Figure 5.10) and finally to the balance sheet. Clear Lake's net income flows from the income statement into

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         5.3 · The Relationship between the Balance Sheet and the Income Statement 139

retained earnings, which is reflected on the statement of retained earnings. The balance in retained earnings
is then reflected on the balance sheet. This flow is depicted in Figure 5.11.

                   Figure 5.11 Connections between Clear Lake Sporting Goods' Balance Sheet and Income Statement

 LINK TO LEARNING
 Apple's Income Statement and Balance Sheet

  Visit the Apple, Inc. Annual Report (https://openstax.org/r/2020-doc-financial-annual-report) for 2020 and
  locate the company's income statement and balance sheet (they begin on page 31). What is the company's
  net income for the most recent year? What is the amount of retained earnings on the balance sheet for the
  current and prior years? Does it appear the company paid out dividends this year?
140 5 · Financial Statements

      Expenses versus Payables

       There is another key relationship between the income statement and the balance sheet can often be confusing
       to non-accountants: an expense versus a payable. The two are often assumed to be the same thing. However,
       it is important to note that the two are distinctly different.
       Let's look at an example to outline the key differences. Clear Lake Sporting Goods incurred utility expenses
       during the current period (electric and gas). Its utilities totaled $1,500. In the month that followed, the utilities
       vendor sent an invoice for $1,500. Clear Lake has incurred an expense. It will reflect an expense of $1,500 on
       the income statement for the utilities expense. This is the income statement impact of the transaction. So is it
       safe to assume that because Clear Lake has an expense, it also used cash? Not necessarily. Or is it safe to
       assume that if the company has an expense, it is the same as a payable? Again, the answer is no.
       Remember, the accounting equation rests on the foundation of the double-entry accounting system. This
       means that every transaction has two sides: a debit and a credit. They must be equal. When Clear Lake records
       an expense of $1,500, it must also record the other half of that transaction. In this case, the company incurred
       utilities expenses throughout the period "on account," which means it records an increase in their accounts
       payable. When the invoice comes due, another transaction must then be recorded to reduce accounts payable
       and reduce cash. Accounts payable is a liability found on the balance sheet, normally a current liability. The
       expense incurred caused the payable, but it is distinctly separate from the payable (see Figure 5.12).

                                                     Figure 5.12 Connections between Expenses and Accounts Payable

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                    5.4 · The Statement of Owner's Equity 141

 5.4 The Statement of Owner's Equity

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Explain the concept of owner's equity.
  · Outline the purpose and importance of the statement of owner's equity.
  · Identify the structure and key elements of the statement of owner's equity.

What Is Equity?

Recall that the accounting equation can help us see what is owned (assets), who is owed (liabilities), and finally
who the owners are (equity). The statement of owner's equity addresses the last segment of the accounting
equation in detail by laying out the equity elements of the firm and highlighting changes in these elements
throughout the period.
Equity represents the ownership of the firm. The stockholders' equity section of the balance sheet for
corporations contains two primary categories of accounts. The first is paid-in capital or contributed
capital--consisting of amounts paid in by owners. The second category is earned capital, consisting of
amounts earned by the corporation as part of business operations. On the balance sheet, retained earnings is
a key component of the earned capital section, while the stock accounts such as common stock, preferred
stock, and additional paid-in capital are the primary components of the contributed capital section.
Common stock represents ownership in the firm. Common stockholders normally have voting rights.
Preferred stock has unique rights that are "preferred," or more advantageous, to shareholders than common
stock. Unlike common stockholders, preferred shareholders typically do not have voting rights and do not
share in the common stock dividend distributions. Instead, the "preferred" classification entitles shareholders
to a dividend that is fixed (assuming sufficient dividends are declared). Treasury stock is shares that were
outstanding and have been repurchased by the firm but not retired. Thus they are still issued, but not
outstanding. Additional paid-in capital is the difference between the issue price and par value of the common
stock. For example, if a firm issued and sold stock at a market price of $20 that had a $5 par value, $5 for each
share would be recorded into common stock and the excess $15 per share would be recorded into the
additional paid-in capital account.
If we review the balance sheet for Clear Lake Sporting Goods, we see just two elements of equity: common
stock and retained earnings. Common stock in the prior year was $75,000 and increased to $80,000 in the
current year, indicating Clear Lake issued additional common stock (see Figure 5.13).

                                                    Figure 5.13 Stockholder Equity Section of Balance Sheet

 THINK IT THROUGH

 Equity Accounts

  Visit the Apple, Inc. Annual Report (https://openstax.org/r/2020-doc-financial-annual-report) for 2020 and
142 5 · Financial Statements

         locate the company's balance sheet (it begins on page 33). What types of equity accounts does it report?
         Solution:
         Apple reports common stock, retained earnings, and accumulated other comprehensive income.

      Distributions to Owners

       When firms earn a profit, they have two options as to what to do with their earnings. They can keep (retain)
       them and reinvest them back into the business, or they can pay them out to their shareholders in the form of
       dividends. Dividends are commonly in the form of cash, but dividends can be paid out in the form of stock or
       other assets as well.
       To pay a cash dividend, the firm must have enough cash on hand and sufficient retained earnings. They cannot
       pay out a dividend beyond the retained earnings available. Some companies issue shares of stock as a
       dividend rather than cash or property. This often occurs when the company has insufficient cash but wants to
       keep its investors happy. When a company issues a stock dividend, it distributes additional shares of stock to
       existing shareholders.
       A property dividend occurs when the firm pays out dividends in the form of something other than stock or
       cash, often one of their assets or something they hold in inventory. For example, Walt Disney Company may
       choose to distribute tickets to visit its theme parks. A property dividend may be declared when a company
       wants to reward its investors but doesn't have the cash to distribute, or if it needs to hold on to its existing
       cash for other investments.
       Remember, the retained earnings account reflects the cumulative earnings of a firm since they began
       business, less dividends paid out to shareholders. This includes all forms of dividends (cash, stock, and other
       assets). Note that dividends are distributed or paid only to shares of stock that are outstanding. Treasury
       shares are not outstanding, so no dividends are declared or distributed for these shares. Regardless of the
       type of dividend, the declaration always causes a decrease in the retained earnings account.

       THINK IT THROUGH

       Dividends

         Visit the Apple, Inc. Annual Report (https://openstax.org/r/2020-doc-financial-annual-report) for 2020.
         Review the notes to the financial statements found on pages 19 and 20. What kind of dividends did the
         company pay (cash, property, stock)? Review the notes regarding dividends on page 26. What does Apple
         intend to do regarding dividends in the future, pending board approval?
         Solution:
         Apple issued cash dividends. On page 26, it notes that the company intends to increase the dividend
         annually, pending approval by the board.

      Elements of the Statement of Owner's Equity

       Now that we have covered the basic elements of equity and know what dividends are, we have the basic pieces
       we need to create the statement of owner's equity. The statement is broken out into columns, one for each
       element of equity: common stock, preferred stock, additional paid-in capital, retained earnings, and treasury
       stock.
       The first line of the statement provides the balance of each segment as of the first day of the period. Each

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                          5.5 · The Statement of Cash Flows 143

following line provides information on any events during the period that changed the value of any of the
accounts. Common examples of events found on the statement include net income or loss for the period,
issuing common or preferred stock, purchasing or selling treasury stock, and declaring a dividend.
Clear Lake Sporting Goods has just common stock and retained earnings to report in their statement of
owner's equity. They had just two events to report in their statement that impacted their equity accounts; they
reported net income and they issued dividends (see Figure 5.14).

                                      Figure 5.14 Statement of Stockholder Equity for Clear Lake Sporting Goods

 LINK TO LEARNING

 Cash Flows

  Khan Academy (https://openstax.org/l/50CashFlowsVid) explains cash flows in a unique way.

 5.5 The Statement of Cash Flows

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Outline the purpose and importance of the statement of cash flows.
  · Identify the structure and key elements of the statement of cash flows.

The final financial statement is the statement of cash flows. It is a crucial statement, as it shows the sources of
and uses of cash for the firm during the accounting period. Remember, under accrual accounting, transactions
are recorded when they occur, not necessarily when cash moves. Thus, the income statement does not provide
all the insights necessary to understand a firm's cash flows. To fully understand the firm's flow of cash, the
statement of cash flows is needed.

Importance of the Statement of Cash Flows

Remember, most firms use accrual accounting. Revenues and expenses are recorded when they occur, not
necessarily when cash moves. This can create timing differences between profits and cash flows. A firm can be
profitable and still not have an adequate flow of cash. The opposite is also true: it can experience a net loss
and still have cash on hand. Earning a profit is wonderful, but it is not the only goal an organization has. It
must also have adequate cash flow to support daily operations. To support cash planning and to provide
external financial statement users such as lenders and investors information about the firm's cash flow, the
statement of cash flows is prepared. Cash flow is also a crucial metric for determining the value of a company.
External financial statement users also rely on the statement of cash flows to help them evaluate the quality of
the firm's earnings. Users compare earnings to cash flow to assess the validity of the earnings data. For
example, a firm reporting a strong profit but very little cash flow might raise some questions as to what was
recorded to drive profits that isn't also driving cash flows.
The statement of cash flows also helps external users determine the driving forces behind the firm's cash
flows. They can see if cash is generated primarily by daily operations or if cash is being generated or
144 5 · Financial Statements

       consumed by events outside the firm's normal course of business.
       There are two key methods of preparing the statement: direct and indirect. FASB (Financial Accounting
       Standards Board) favors the direct method. Despite that, the most common method used by far in general
       practice is the indirect method. The direct method lists cash flows directly from revenues and expenses,
       whereas the indirect method reconciles income to cash flows. The indirect method begins with net income and
       reconciles each account in order to arrive at net cash flow. It essentially reconciles accrual basis accounting to
       cash basis, or cash flow.

      Operating Activities

       To provide clear information about what areas of the business generated and used cash, the statement of cash
       flows is broken down into three key categories: operating, financing, and investing. The operating section
       reflects cash flows generated by and used by the day-to-day operations of the business. Investing activities
       include investments in other firms as well as investments in the firm itself (items like machinery, land, or other
       fixed assets). Finally, financing activities are those used to provide funds to run the business (loans, interest).
       As mentioned, operating activities are those that are used or generated by the day-to-day operations of the
       firm. The operating activities section of the statement of cash flows begins with net income. All lines
       thereafter, in that section, are then adjustments to reconcile net income to actual cash flows by adding back
       noncash expenses like depreciation and adjusting for changes in asset and liability accounts. For example,
       depreciation is a noncash expense. Thus, depreciation is added back to net income.
       To prepare the statement of cash flows for Clear Lake Sporting Goods, we need the beginning cash balance
       from the balance sheet, net income and depreciation expense from the income statement, and a set of
       comparative balance sheets to see the change in asset and liability accounts (see Figure 5.15).

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                          5.5 · The Statement of Cash Flows 145

                                             Figure 5.15 Comparative Income Statements and Balance Sheets

Clear Lake's statement of cash flows begins with the current year net income of $35,000 from the income
statement. Next, noncash expenses are deducted. Clear Lake's only noncash expense on their current year
income statement is depreciation of $3,600. Since deprecation is an expense that reduces income but is not
actually paid out in cash in the current period, it must be added back to net income to reconcile net income to
cash flow.
Next, changes in operational assets and liabilities are used to continue reconciling net income to actual cash
flow. For example, Clear Lake's accounts receivable increased from the prior period to the current period. This
means that there were more sales recorded but not yet received in cash in this period than there were in the
prior period, making an increase in accounts receivable a reduction on the statement. Inventory increased,
which means additional cash was spent to acquire it, making it a use of cash or reduction to net income to
move closer to cash. Accounts payable and unearned revenue, both liability accounts, increased. Since these
are liabilities, an increase would indicate that the liability was incurred but not as quickly paid out; thus it is an
increase to the statement.
Tallying all these adjustments to net income shows Clear Lake's net cash flows provided by operating activities
of $53,600 (see Figure 5.16).
146 5 · Financial Statements

                                                 Figure 5.16 Operating Activities Section of the Statement of Cash Flows

      Investing Activities

       As mentioned, investing activities include investments in other firms as well as investments in the firm itself
       (items like machinery, land, or other fixed assets). These are items that are capitalized (placed on the balance
       sheet and depreciated over time) and thus did not reduce net income. They did, however, cause an impact to
       cash flow (see Figure 5.17).
       During the current year, Clear Lake purchased an additional $5,000 in short-term investments (see the
       comparative balances sheets; the balance in that account increased by $5,000 since the prior year). They also
       purchased additional plant assets in the amount of $13,600. This amount can be figured by comparing the
       difference in the current and prior plant assets accounts and including the impact of current year depreciation
       ($50,000 current year balance less $40,000 prior year balance and $3,600 of depreciation = $13,600 of new
       assets purchased).

                                                 Figure 5.17 Investing Activities Section of the Statement of Cash Flows

      Financing Activities

       Recall that financing activities are those used to provide funds to run the business. Common items in this
       section of the statement include the payment of dividends, issuance of common or preferred stock, and
       issuance or payment of notes payable (see Figure 5.18).
       In the current year, Clear Lake took out additional notes payable (a cash inflow). We can see this by the
       increase in their notes payable account from the prior year to current year ($40,000 to $50,000). This is an
       inflow of cash and thus an increase on the statement. Dividends of $30,000 were paid to shareholders (found
       on the statement of retained earnings and the statement of owner's equity). Finally, we see that Clear Lake
       must have issued additional common stock, as their common stock balance increased from $75,000 to $80,000.

                                                 Figure 5.18 Financing Activities Section of the Statement of Cash Flows

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                          5.5 · The Statement of Cash Flows 147

 LINK TO LEARNING
 Statement of Cash Flows

  Visit the Apple, Inc. Annual Report (https://openstax.org/r/2020-doc-financial-annual-report) for 2020 and
  locate the company's statement of cash flows (it begins on page 35). What is the cash provided by/used by
  operating activities? Review the key adjustments in the operating section. What are the biggest
  adjustments? Review the investing section of the statement. Did the company have a net cash inflow or net
  cash used by investing? What key items appear in this section? What was the net cash provided by or used
  by financing activities? What key items appear in this section for Apple?

The final task to wrap up the statement of cash flows is to tally net cash generated or used by summing all
three sections. This amount is then used to adjust the beginning cash balance from the balance sheet.
Assuming the statement was prepared correctly, the sum should equal the ending cash balance on the
balance sheet.
In the full statement, we can see that Clear Lake has net cash flow of $20,000. The beginning cash balance was
$90,000, making the ending cash balance $110,000 (see Figure 5.19).

                                                               Figure 5.19 Full Statement of Cash Flows

Analyzing Performance

The statement of cash flows can be used in a number of ways to assess firm performance by both internal and
external financial statement users. Internal users can assess sources of and uses of cash in order to aid in
adapting, as necessary, to ensure adequate future cash flows. External users also use the statement. Recall
that comparing net income to operational cash flows can help assess the quality of earnings. In the next
section you'll explore operating cash flow and free cash flow to the firm, two key points of analysis in
148 5 · Financial Statements

       assessing cash flows.

      5.6 Operating Cash Flow and Free Cash Flow to the Firm (FCFF)

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Calculate operating cash flow and free cash flow.
         · Assess organizational cash management performance.

      Operating Cash Flow

       Now that we have a statement of cash flows prepared, we can move on to a few key elements of the statement
       used to assess organizational cash management performance. Operating cash flow, or net cash flow from
       operating activities, is calculated in the first section of the statement of cash flows. It depicts the cash
       generated (or used by) the primary business activities. Remember, operating cash flow is calculated under the
       indirect method by adjusting net income for noncash expenses like depreciation and adjustments for changes
       in current asset and liability accounts (changes in working capital).

       Operating cash flow is helpful in assessing organizational cash management performance as it relates to the
       core business function--operations. Key management practices in this area can have a profound impact on
       the firm's cash flow. Practices and policies include customer payment terms, collection policies and practices,
       and vendor payment terms. Though changing a customer or vendor payment terms will not change the profit
       or loss for the firm, it will have an impact on the timing to cash flows. This is a key element of managing
       operational cash flow.

      Free Cash Flow

       Free cash flow (FCF) is calculated by taking operating cash flows less capital expenditures. Free cash flow is an
       important measure, as it depicts the cash available to support the business's operations and maintain its fixed
       assets. It is commonly used by investors as part of their overall evaluation of an investment, as it is a key
       measure of cash flow management practices and a firm's ability to generate enough cash to cover operations
       and capital assets and it shows if there is any left over for other considerations such as dividend payments,
       debt repayment, and contributions to increase working capital for future growth.

       Using the data for Clear Lake Sporting Goods, we can calculate its free cash flow as follows:

       This means that Clear Lake Sporting Goods has $40,000 of cash available to repay debt or pay cash dividends
       after having covered the cash needs of its operations and capital asset investments.

      Managing Cash Flow

       Managing cash flow is not an easy task. A firm has a myriad of places that its cash flows from or to. However,
       there are a few key areas to place attention in order to manage or improve cash flows. First, consider where
       cash is coming from--customers. Managing terms and collection efforts with customers can have a significant
       impact on a firm's cash flow. For example, a customer with terms of net 10 will likely yield payment quite
       quickly--10 days, give or take. A customer with terms of net 60, on the other hand, will require roughly 60 days
       to collect assuming they pay on time. The 50-day difference between these two examples means that the firm
       will go 50 additional days having expended the resources to provide the customer their good or service, but
       with no cash flow yet to cover it.
       The same theory holds true on the opposite side with accounts payable and the vendors a firm uses. Accepting

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                               5.7 · Common-Size Statements 149

net 10 terms requires the firm to give up its cash quickly, while pushing for more favorable terms like net 30 or
net 60 allows the firm to wait much longer to give up its cash.

It is important to assess both sides of cash flow and the impact it has on the firm as well as the customer and
vendor relationships it maintains. Some customers may not have difficulty negotiating a more favorable
payment term in order for the firm to improve its cash flow. Others, however, may not be willing to accept
shorter payment terms. In order to be competitive in the industry, the firm must assess the customer
relationships, industry standards, and its own ability to support cash flow when considering its customer
payment terms.

When there is a gap in cash flow, it is crucial that it is recognized early, with proper cash flow forecasting, so
financing can be obtained to bridge the gap. A common tool used to manage the ebb and flow of cash flow for
a firm is an open line of credit with a bank. This allows the firm to borrow and repay from month to month as
cash flow fluctuates.

Now that you've become more familiar with the four basic financial statements, let's move on to a tool helpful
in evaluating them: common-size statements. Common-size financial statements, also termed vertical analysis,
restate the financial statement items as a percentage of a base item. Doing so helps reveal relationships
between items, aids in assessing performance over time, and makes it easier to compare one company to
another, regardless of size (thus the name common-size).

 5.7 Common-Size Statements

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Prepare common-size statements.
  · Assess organizational performance using common-size statements.
  · Use industry comparisons to assess organizational performance.

Common-Size Income Statements

A common-size income statement is created by restating each line as a percentage of net sales. Expressing
each item on the income statement as a percentage rather than in absolute dollars makes it much easier to
make comparisons, particularly to other divisions or competitors of varying sizes. The formula to calculate
each item on the income statement is:

Using Clear Lake Sporting Goods' current year income statement, we can see how each line item in it is divided
by net sales in order to assemble a common-size income statement (see Figure 5.20).
150 5 · Financial Statements

                                                                     Figure 5.20 Common-Size Income Statement

       It may seem cumbersome to create a common-size statement. However, a simple tool like Microsoft Excel can
       be quite handy in making the process easier and faster. The same formula can be copied and replicated in
       each income statement line, making the calculations much faster. In Figure 5.21, you can see the formulas
       used to create Clear Lake Sporting Goods' common-size income statement in Excel. Notice that the $ can be
       inserted to anchor a cell reference, making it easier to copy and paste the same formula onto many lines or
       columns.

                                 Figure 5.21 Clear Lake Sporting Goods Common-Size Income Statements with Excel Formulas

      Common-Size Balance Sheet

       The common-size balance sheet functions much like the common-size income statement. Each line item on the
       balance sheet is restated as a percentage of total assets.
       Using Clear Lake Sporting Goods' current balance sheet, we can see how each line item in its statement is
       divided by total assets in order to assemble a common-size balance sheet (see Figure 5.22).

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                               5.7 · Common-Size Statements 151

                                                                Figure 5.22 Common-Size Balance Sheet

Excel can also be used to create a common-size balance sheet. Once the formula is created, it can be copied
into each line, making the process to create a common-size statement much easier (see Figure 5.23):
152 5 · Financial Statements

                                                         Figure 5.23 Common-Size Balance Sheet with Excel Formulas

       It is important to note that while we have provided two years of data here to explore the process, when
       performing analysis for a firm or investment, several years of data are commonly used to provide a better view
       of historical performance.

      Analyzing Organizational Performance

       Common-size financial statements facilitate the analysis of financial performance by converting each element
       of the statements to a percentage. This makes it easier to compare figures from one period to the next,
       compare departments within an organization, and compare the firm to other companies of any size as well as
       industry averages. On the income statement, analysts can see how much of sales revenue is spent on each
       type of expense. They can see this breakdown for each firm and compare how different firms function in terms
       of expenses, proportionally. They can also look at the percentage for each expense over time to see if they are
       spending more or less on certain areas of the business, such as research and development. On the balance
       sheet, analysts commonly look to see the percentage of debt and equity to determine capital structure. They
       can also quickly see the percentage of current versus noncurrent assets and liabilities.
       In Clear Lake Sporting Goods' common-size income statement for the current and prior years, we can see that
       cost of goods as a percentage of sales remained the same (see Figure 5.24). This means that while sales

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                               5.7 · Common-Size Statements 153

increased, so did cost of goods sold, but it increased at the same proportion as sales. No improvement or
decline occurred in the company's cost of goods sold. The same is true for rent, depreciation, and utilities
expenses. One key item did change slightly as a percentage: salaries expense. The 2 percent decrease in
operating income from the prior year's 38 percent to the current year's 36 percent was caused by the increase
in salaries expense as a percentage of sales.
Net income, however, only declined by 1 percent from 30 percent in the prior year to 29 percent in the current
year because interest expense dropped by 1 percent, offsetting the 2 percent increase in salaries expense.

                                                            Figure 5.24 Common-Size Income Statement

 LINK TO LEARNING
 Common-Size Income Statement

  Visit the Apple, Inc. Common-Size Income Statement (https://openstax.org/r/common-size-income-
  statement) provided by the Stock Analysis on Net website. Review the company's cost of sales, gross profit,
  operating income, other income, and net income percentages for the current and prior year. What can you
  learn about the company's recent performance in these areas? Has it improved or declined, or has it simply
  changed incrementally with gross sales?

On the Clear Lake Sporting Goods' common-size balance sheet, we see that current assets remained at 80
percent of total assets from the prior to current year (see Figure 5.25). The mix of current assets that comprise
that 80 percent changed only slightly with a 1 percent decrease in cash, 2 percent increase in accounts
receivable, 2 percent decrease in inventory, and no change in short-term investments. Noncurrent assets
includes only equipment. While the balance in the equipment account did change as a percentage of total
assets, equipment remained the same at 20 percent.
On the debt and equity side of the balance sheet, however, there were a few percentage changes worth
noting. In the prior year, the balance sheet reflected 55 percent debt and 45 percent equity. In the current
year, that balance shifted to 60 percent debt and 40 percent equity. The firm did issue additional stock and
showed an increase in retained earnings, both totaling a $10,000 increase in equity. However, the equity
increase was much smaller than the total increase in liabilities of $40,000. Long-term debt increased by only
$10,000 by issuing additional notes payable. The remainder of that increase is seen in the 5 percent increase in
current liabilities. In that increase, most of it was in unearned revenue.
154 5 · Financial Statements

                                                                         Figure 5.25 Common-Size Balance Sheet

       LINK TO LEARNING
       Common-Size Assets and Common-Size Liabilities and Equity

         Visit the Apple, Inc. Common-Size Assets (https://openstax.org/r/common-size-assets) Balance Sheet and
         Common-Size Liabilities and Equity (https://openstax.org/r/common-size-liabilities) Balance Sheet provided
         by the Stock Analysis on Net website. Review the composition of the company's assets, liabilities, and
         equity. How have assets changed? Has capital structure changed? If so, what elements impacted the
         change?

      Industry Comparison

       Recall that a key benefit of common-size analysis is comparing the firm's performance to the industry.
       Expressing the figures on the income statement and balance sheet as percentages rather than raw dollar
       figures allows for comparison to other companies regardless of size differences.
       Clear Lake Sporting Goods, for example, might compare their financial performance on their income
       statement to a key competitor, Charlie's Camping World. Charlie is a much bigger retailer for outdoor gear, as
       Charlie has nearly seven times greater sales than Clear Lake. Common-size statements allow Clear Lake to
       compare their statements in a meaningful way (see Figure 5.26). Notice that Clear Lake spends 50 percent of
       its sales on cost of goods sold while Charlie spends 59 percent. This is a significant difference that would be an
       indicator that Clear Lake and Charlie have key differences in their operations, purchasing policies, or general
       performance in their core products.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                               5.7 · Common-Size Statements 155

We know that Charlie is a bigger retailer, and we see this clearly in the rent expense as a percentage of sales.
Charlie spends 11 percent of its sales on building rent, while Clear Lake spends only 5 percent. A clear
difference in performance is hinted at here, alluding to Charlie spending more per square foot on rent or using
its retail space differently, causing it to rent more space for its product per sales dollar than Clear Lake does.
Depreciation expense, though not a large figure, is smaller for Charlie, giving us a hint that Charlie has less
capital equipment than Clear Lake, perhaps tied to the higher rent expense. It is possible that Charlie rents
some of its equipment, which would help explain the higher rent percentage. Finally, Charlie's salaries
percentage is significantly higher at 12 percent than Clear Lake's 5 percent. Though the simple percentage
does not tell us why, it does provide us a hint and allow for further questions or investigation. Charlie may pay
its employees a much higher wage than Clear Lake. They may also have far more sales associates on the floor
in their larger spaces than Clear Lake does in their smaller retail spaces.
Note that although we have compared just two years of data for Charlie and Clear Lake, it is more common to
use several years of data to get a more robust view of long-term trends.

                                                Figure 5.26 Comparison of Common-Size Income Statements

 LINK TO LEARNING
 Microsoft versus Apple

  Locate the sales, cost of goods sold, and gross profit data for Microsoft (https://openstax.org/r/microsoft-
  financial)'s most current period using Yahoo! Finance. Calculate the common-size percentage for cost of
  goods sold and gross profit (cost of goods sold divided by net sales, and gross profit divided by net sales).
  Compare these percentages to those of Apple, Inc (https://openstax.org/r/common-size-income-
  statement)., a key competitor, on its common-size income statement. What can you learn about the
  performance of each firm based on these two percentages?

Now that you have covered the basic financial statements and a little bit about how they are used, where do
we find them? How often are they prepared? Who gets them? In this next section we will explore the
requirements for what needs to be reported, when, and to whom.
156 5 · Financial Statements

      5.8 Reporting Financial Activity

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Identify the most common types of accounting periods.
         · Outline key considerations and accounting principles that dictate the timing of financial reporting.
         · Describe the SEC reporting requirements relevant to financial statements.
         · Identify the key elements of a company annual report.

      Defining Accounting Periods

       An accounting period can be any period of time, but the most common accounting periods are months,
       quarters, and a year. Accounting periods are important, particularly in accrual accounting, so there are clear
       cutoffs for recording transactions.
       It is important to note that Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) require companies to provide
       quarterly financial statements. However, most firms, even those not covered by GAAP, prepare financial
       statements monthly in order to provide timely data to their financial statement users both internally and
       externally.
       Time Period Principle
       Providing information to financial statement users in a timely fashion brings us to our next key topic, which is
       the time period principle. In order for information to be useful, it must be timely. This means that financial
       statement users need to get the statements quickly enough to be able to make relevant decisions with them.
       Providing statements on a timely basis is the foundation of the time period accounting principle.
       Fiscal versus Calendar Year
       Though a firm may present financial statements monthly, quarterly, and annually, not all time periods are
       created equal. Firms have the option to choose between a fiscal and a calendar year. The calendar year, which
       begins January 1 and ends December 31, is the traditional year we are accustomed to. The calendar year,
       however, doesn't always work well with a firm's business cycle. Due to seasonality or other factors, a firm may
       choose to adopt a fiscal year with their own beginning and end date. For example, a firm may choose to start
       its fiscal year on June 1 and end it on May 31. A firm can opt to change from a fiscal to a calendar year or vice
       versa but must only do so for a justifiable reason.

       THINK IT THROUGH

       Fiscal versus Calendar Year

         Visit the Apple, Inc. Annual Report (https://openstax.org/r/2020-doc-financial-annual-report) for 2020 and
         review the title of the table of contents on page 1. The title reads "Apple Inc. Form 10-K." The next line
         provides information on the company's chosen time period. Does Apple use a fiscal or calendar year?
         Solution:
         Apple uses a fiscal year. Their fiscal year ended on September 26, 2020.

      The Annual Report

       An annual report is part of the 10-K filing that publicly traded firms must provide to the SEC and investors each
       year. The report details the firm's operations and performance for the year and its current financial conditions.
       The report contains general company information, the firm's financial statements, notes to the financial

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                            5.8 · Reporting Financial Activity 157

statements, various required disclosures pertaining to accounting policies, the management discussion and
analysis (MD&A) statement, a letter from the CEO to the shareholders, and the firm's audit report.

 THINK IT THROUGH

 Annual Report Key Elements

  Visit the Apple, Inc. Annual Report (https://openstax.org/r/2020-doc-financial-annual-report) for 2020 and
  review the title of the table of contents on page 1. What key elements would you be drawn to review if you
  were a potential investor? In Part II of the table of contents, find the MD&A report (page 20) and use the
  table of contents link to navigate to it. What key highlights and challenges did the company report for the
  year?

  Solution:

  Answers may vary. A few key items of note might include risk factors, financial statements, the MD&A letter,
  and disclosures about market risk. Apple's MD&A reported significant updates on the impact of the
  COVID-19 pandemic, a few financial updates, product updates, segment performance data, a conversation
  about its debt, contractual obligations, and accounting policies.

SEC Reporting Requirements

The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) requires publicly traded firms to regularly provide several
reports. The two most common are the 10-K and quarterly report (10-Q). Certain unique events also require an
additional filing called an 8-K. There are many events that might require reporting. A few key examples include
changes to rights of shareholders, changes in control of the company, and amendments to the company
charter or bylaws.

The quarterly report is much like the annual report already discussed. It contains the firm's financial
statements, required accounting disclosures, statements on internal control, and a management discussion
and analysis (MD&A) letter. It does not contain an auditor's report, as firms are not audited on a quarterly
basis. Quarterly reports are helpful to investors because they provide information on a timely enough basis to
be relevant.

 LINK TO LEARNING

 Investor Relations

  Visit the Apple, Inc. Investor Relations page, SEC Filings section (https://openstax.org/r/sec-filings). Notice
  how many different reports Apple files regularly with the SEC. Locate the most recent quarterly (10-Q) and
  annual reports (10-K) and scan the table of contents. How does the quarterly report differ from the annual
  report? Do you notice key items in the annual report not provided in the quarterly report?
158 5 · Summary

Summary

5.1 The Income Statement

The income statement reflects a firm's performance over a period of time. Most financial statements are
prepared monthly, quarterly, and annually. The income statement reflects sales less cost of goods sold to
arrive at gross profit. Operating costs are deducted to arrive at operating income. Finally, other
nonoperational costs like interest and taxes are deducted to arrive at net income.

5.2 The Balance Sheet

The balance sheet reflects the financial position of a firm as of a particular point in time. It is laid out to clearly

depict and support the accounting equation:                    A classified balance

sheet breaks down the assets and liabilities sections into current and noncurrent for greater transparency.

5.3 The Relationship between the Balance Sheet and the Income Statement

The financial statements are all tied together. The income statement is generated first, as net income is
needed in order to determine the ending balance of retained earnings, a key account in the equity section of
the balance sheet.

5.4 The Statement of Owner's Equity

The statement of owner's equity is divided by each type of equity the firm has: common stock, preferred stock,
additional paid-in capital, and retained earnings, for example. Beginning balances are provided, and all key
transactions impacting equity are provided in order to show how ending balance were derived. Key
transactions commonly include recording net income or loss, issuing additional stock, and paying out
dividends.

5.5 The Statement of Cash Flows

Under accrual accounting, transactions are recorded when they occur, not necessarily when cash moves. This
creates a timing difference. Net profit, therefore, does not necessarily mean a firm has cash, and a net loss
doesn't mean they don't have any cash. To reconcile net income to actual cash flow and see how a firm
generates and uses its funds, a statement of cash flows is prepared. The statement reflects cash flow from
operating activities, financing activities, and investing activities.

5.6 Operating Cash Flow and Free Cash Flow to the Firm (FCFF)

Operating cash flow reflects the cash generated by (or used by) the core business function. Free cash flow to
the firm (FCFF) or simply free cash flow (FCF) is calculated by deducting capital expenditures from operating
cash flow. FCF reflects the cash available to repay debts, pay dividends to shareholders, and contribute to cash
needs for growth.

5.7 Common-Size Statements

Common-size statements are a restatement of the financial statements with all dollar figures restated as a
percentage. On the income statement, each line is restated as a percentage of net sales. On the balance sheet,
each line is restated as a percentage of total assets. Common-size statements are useful for analysis and are
particularly helpful in comparing firms of different sizes.

5.8 Reporting Financial Activity

Publicly traded firms must file company and financial data with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)
on a regular basis. Key reports include the quarterly report, called a 10-Q, and the annual report, called a 10-K.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                5 · Key Terms 159

     Key Terms

accounting equation
accrual basis accounting system in which revenue is recorded or recognized when earned yet not

    necessarily received, and in which expenses are recorded when legally incurred and not necessarily when
    paid
assets tangible or intangible resources owned or controlled by a company, individual, or other entity with the
    intent that they will provide economic value
cash basis method of accounting in which transactions are not recorded in the financial statements until
    there is an exchange of cash
current assets asset typically used up, sold, or converted to cash in one year or less
current liabilities debt or obligation due within one year or, in rare cases, a company's standard operating
    cycle, whichever is greater
depreciation process of allocating the costs of a tangible asset over the asset's economic life
direct method approach used to determine net cash flows from operating activities, whereby accrual basis
    revenue and expenses are converted to cash basis collections and payments
dividends portion of the net worth (equity) that is returned to owners of a corporation as a reward for their
    investment
expenses costs associated with providing goods or services
free cash flow operating cash, reduced by expected capital expenditures
gains increases in organizational value from activities that are "incidental or peripheral" to the primary
    purpose of the business
income statement financial statement that measures the organization's financial performance for a given
    period of time
indirect method approach used to determine net cash flows from operating activities, starting with net
    income and adjusting for items that impact new income but do not require outlay of cash
liabilities probable future sacrifice of economic benefits arising from present obligations of a particular
    entity to transfer assets or provide services to other entities in the future as a result of past transactions or
    events
loss decrease in organizational value from activities that are "incidental or peripheral" to the primary
    purpose of the business
net income revenues and gains that are greater than expenses and losses
noncash expenses expenses that reduce net income but are not associated with a cash flow; most common
    example is depreciation expense
noncurrent assets assets used in the normal course of business for more than one year that are not
    intended to be resold
noncurrent liabilities liabilities that are expected to be settled in more than one year
owner's equity residual interest in the assets of an entity that remains after deducting its liabilities
retained earnings cumulative, undistributed net income or net loss for the business since its inception
revenue inflows or other enhancements of assets of an entity or settlements of liabilities from delivering or
    producing goods, rendering services, or other activities that constitute the entity's ongoing major or central
    operations
statement of cash flows financial statement listing the cash inflows and cash outflows for the business for a
    period of time

     CFA Institute

This chapter supports some of the Learning Outcome Statements (LOS) in this CFA® Level I Study Session
(https://openstax.org/r/media-document-study-session). Reference with permission of CFA Institute.
160 5 · Multiple Choice

     Multiple Choice

 1. Which of the following is a measure of the performance of a firm's daily operations?
      a. gross profit
      b. cost of goods sold
       c. operating income
      d. net income

 2. In which section of the classified balance sheet would you find a note payable due in six months?
      a. current assets
      b. current liabilities
       c. noncurrent liabilities
      d. common stock

 3. Which financial statement must be prepared first?
      a. statement of retained earnings
      b. balance sheet
       c. statement of cash flows
      d. income statement

 4. Which of the following represents earned capital on the statement of owner's equity?
      a. retained earnings
      b. common stock
       c. preferred stock
      d. additional paid-in capital

 5. Which section of the statement of cash flows reflects the cash generated from or used by a company's
     day-to-day operations?
      a. investing activities
      b. financing activities
       c. operating activities
      d. noncash activities

 6. How do you calculate free cash flow (FCF)?
      a. net income less dividends
      b. operating income less capital expenditures
       c. gross profit less depreciation
      d. net income plus interest

 7. How do you calculate common-size analysis on the income statement?
      a. income statement line item/gross profit
      b. income statement line item/net income
       c. net sales/income statement line item
      d. income statement line item/net sales

 8. Which of the following does not represent a filing commonly required by the SEC?
      a. annual report, 10-K
      b. quarterly report, 10-Q
       c. Form 8-K
      d. 1040

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                   5 · Review Questions 161

    Review Questions

1. What is the difference between gross profit and net income?
2. If a classified balance sheet has total assets of $900,000 and total owner's equity of $350,000, what must

    the company's total liabilities be?
3. What key element of the income statement flows through to the balance sheet?
4. What key columns are commonly found on the statement of owner's equity?
5. Ted's firm reported net income for the current period of $65,750. Is it safe to assume that because Ted's

    firm reported such a large net income, it has plenty of cash to fund its operations? Why or why not?
6. What useful insights does free cash flow (FCF) provide in financial analysis?
7. Describe how common-size statements are useful.
8. What is the difference between a calendar year and a fiscal year?

    Problems

1. Rickey's Retail has the following financial information for the most recent accounting period. Prepare an
    income statement.

2. Big Box has the following accounts. In which section of its classified balance sheet does each belong?
    Cash
    Wages payable
    Taxes payable
    Accounts receivable
    Retained earnings
    Common stock
    Land
    Note payable due in 10 years
    Prepaid insurance

3. Big Box Outlet has $10,350 of supplies expense on its income statement. Does this mean that there must
    also be a supplies payable account balance of $10,350 on its balance sheet? Why or why not?

4. What are the three key types of dividends a firm might distribute to their shareholders? Describe each.
5. Big Box Outlet had an increase in its accounts payable account this period and a decrease in its accounts

    receivable, took out a long-term note payable, paid dividends to its shareholders, had depreciation on its
162 5 · Video Activity

     equipment, bought new equipment, increased its inventory account, and repaid a bond. In which section
     of the statement of cash flows would each of these items appear?
 6. Kokoya's Firm calculates its free cash flow at only $2,000, which the company feels is quite low based on its
     historical performance and compared to others in its industry. What actions might Kokoya's Firm take to
     improve its overall cash flow?
 7. Complete the common-size income statement for Big Box Outlet using the information below:

 8. List at least eight items commonly found in a firm's annual report filed with the SEC.

     Video Activity

The Income Statement Explained
Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/income-statement-explain)
 1. In the video, you see two years of data for Imaginary Ltd. The company had the same sales and same

     operating profit in both years. However, its performance really wasn't the same from one year to the next.
     How do the details of the income statement help you see this? What key performance measures were you
     able to glean from the income statement?
 2. Though the key elements of the income statement can be summarized as simply all the firm's revenues
     and expenses, how would you describe the elements of the income statement in more detail? Assume you
     were consulting for a friend who owns a small dairy farm. What items would you expect to see on their
     income statement? Make a list and be as detailed as you can. Curious if your list is accurate? Consider
     doing an online search to find an income statement for a dairy farm or similar business. Compare its
     income statement to your list to see if you had the right idea.
How the Balance Sheet Works
Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/balance-sheet-works)
 3. In the video, before the example started, a fair amount of discussion time was devoted to the accounting
     equation, double-entry accounting, and the past versus the present data. How do all of these concepts tie
     together in the balance sheet and the type of data we can hope to glean from a balance sheet?
 4. Three key account types are represented on the balance sheet: assets, liabilities, and equity. Much like the
     income statement, however, there is a great deal more detail to a balance sheet than simply these three

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                   5 · Video Activity 163

figures. What additional accounts and detail can you find on the balance sheet? If you were to look up the
balance sheet for the company that sells your favorite thing (e.g., coffee, your laptop, your phone, candy),
what types of accounts do you think you will find on its balance sheet? Consider doing an online search for
the company's balance sheet to see if your guess is correct.
164 5 · Video Activity
Access for free at openstax.org
6 · Why It Matters                                                                                                                    165

 6
              Measures of Financial Health

Figure 6.1 Organizations must continually measure their financial health in order to remain successful. (credit: "Money" by Pictures
of Money/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline

  6.1 Ratios: Condensing Information into Smaller Pieces
  6.2 Operating Efficiency Ratios
  6.3 Liquidity Ratios
  6.4 Solvency Ratios
  6.5 Market Value Ratios
  6.6 Profitability Ratios and the DuPont Method

      Why It Matters

Financial analysis is a crucial element of business, but it can be used in personal finance as well. It differs
depending on the role and perspective of those performing the analysis. For example, your personal
accountant will have different goals and needs in making recommendations to you about your personal
finances. All accounting professionals use financial analysis to check for validity, accurate data, compliance in
reporting, and more.

Some tactics for managing your personal finances can be the same as for managing business finances. For
example, reducing expenses and maximizing returns on long-term investments are always good practices.
Debt can also be a beneficial tool in both personal and professional finances when used appropriately. Debt is
neither inherently good nor bad; it simply needs to be properly managed in order to achieve a reasonable
return in exchange for the cost and risk it poses.

Though the process and tools may be similar, financial analysis from a business perspective has different goals
and needs. Investors are looking to identify firm performance, financial health, and profitability. Financial
analysts closely review information found on financial statements so they can make informed business
decisions. The income statement, statement of retained earnings, balance sheet, and statement of cash flows,
among other financial information, are analyzed for internal and external stakeholders and provide a company
with valuable information about its overall performance and specific areas for improvement. The analysis can
166 6 · Measures of Financial Health

       help with budgeting and making decisions about where the company could cut costs, how it might increase
       revenues, and what capital investment opportunities it should pursue.

       LINK TO LEARNING

       Financial Analyst

         Lots of individuals and companies perform financial analysis. One of these roles is that of a financial
         analyst. The skills and qualifications of a financial analyst vary widely from one industry to another, but
         there are a number of similarities in individuals who hold these roles. As you watch the video about
         financial analysts (https://openstax.org/r/video-about-financial-analysts), consider your own career path
         and how your skills, abilities, and interests may fit this role.

      6.1 Ratios: Condensing Information into Smaller Pieces

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Explain the importance of financial statement analysis in making informed decisions about business
             opportunities.
         · Outline the limitations of financial statement analysis in making investment decisions.

       When considering the outcomes from analysis, it is important for a company to understand that the data
       generated needs to be compared to similar data within the industry at large as well as that of close
       competitors. The company should also consider its past experience and how it corresponds to current and
       future performance expectations.

      Importance of Ratios and Analysis

       Financial ratios help internal and external stakeholders make informed decisions about actions like investing,
       becoming a supplier, making a loan, or altering internal operations, among other things. The information
       resulting from ratio analysis can be used to examine trends in performance, establish benchmarks for success,
       set budget expectations, and compare industry competitors. There are four main types of ratios: liquidity,
       solvency, efficiency, and profitability. While outcomes for some ratios may seem more ideal, the industry in
       which the business operates can change the influence of these outcomes on stakeholder decisions.

       There are several benefits to analyzing financial statements. The information can show trends over time, which
       can help in making future business decisions. Converting information to percentages or ratios eliminates
       some of the disparities between competitors' sizes and operating abilities, making it easier for stakeholders to
       make informed decisions. It can assist with understanding the makeup of current operations within the
       business and which shifts need to occur internally to increase productivity.

      Limitation of Financial Statement Analysis

       Though useful, it's important to note that there are limitations to financial statement analysis as well.
       Stakeholders need to remember that past performance does not always predict future performance. Economic
       influences, such as inflation or a recession, could skew the data being analyzed. Additionally, the way a
       company reports information may change over time. For example, there could be changes in where and when
       certain transactions are recorded, and this may not be immediately evident to financial statement users. It is
       also key to note that though all publicly traded companies in the United States are required to follow Generally
       Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP), there are many estimates and flexibility in how some standards are
       applied. This means that firms can still follow accounting standards appropriately but present some
       information differently from other firms.

       It makes good sense for a company to use financial statement analysis to guide future operations so it can

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                             6.2 · Operating Efficiency Ratios 167

budget properly, control costs, increase revenues, and make long-term expenditure decisions. As long as
stakeholders understand the limitations of financial statement analysis, it is a useful way to predict growth and
financial strength.
Despite limitations, ratios are still a valuable tool if used appropriately. The next section discusses several
operating efficiency ratios including accounts receivable turnover, total asset turnover, inventory turnover, and
days' sales in inventory. Operating efficiency ratios help users see how well management is using the financial
assets of the firm.

 6.2 Operating Efficiency Ratios

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Calculate accounts receivable turnover to assess a firm's performance in managing customer receivables.
  · Evaluate management's use of assets using total asset turnover and inventory turnover.
  · Assess organizational performance using days' sales in inventory calculations.

Efficiency ratios show how well a company uses and manages its assets, one key element of financial health.
Important areas of efficiency are the management of sales, accounts receivable, and inventory. A company
that is efficient will usually be able to generate revenues quickly using the assets it has acquired. Let's examine
four efficiency ratios: accounts receivable turnover, total asset turnover, inventory turnover, and days' sales
in inventory.

Accounts Receivable Turnover

For our discussion of financial statement analysis, we will look at Clear Lake Sporting Goods. Clear Lake
Sporting Goods is a small merchandising company (a company that buys finished goods and sells them to
consumers) that sells hunting and fishing gear. Figure 6.2 shows the comparative income statements and
balance sheets for the past two years.

Figure 6.2 Comparative Income Statements and Year-End Balance Sheets Note that the comparative income statements and
168 6 · Measures of Financial Health

        balance sheets have been simplified here and do not fully reflect all possible company accounts.

       To begin an analysis of receivables, it's important to first understand the cycles and periods used in the
       calculations.
       Operating Cycle
       A period is one operating cycle of a business. The operating cycle includes the cash conversion cycle plus the
       accounts receivable cycle (discussed below). Essentially it is the time it takes a business to purchase or make
       inventory and then sell it. For example, assume Clear Lake Sporting Goods orders and receives a shipment of
       fishing lures on June 1. It stocks the shelves with lures and tracks its inventory and sales. By July 15, all the
       lures from that shipment are gone. In this example, Clear Lake's operating cycle is 45 days.
       Cash Conversion Cycle
       Cash, however, doesn't necessarily flow linearly with accounting periods or operating cycles. The cash
       conversion cycle is the time it takes to spend cash to purchase inventory, produce the product, sell it, and then
       collect cash from the customer. Accounts receivable is one section of that cycle. Referring to Clear Lake's June
       1 shipment of lures that sold by July 15, assume that some of the customers were fishing guides that keep an
       open account with Clear Lake. This company did not pay for its lures until August 15 when it settled its
       account. In this example, Clear Lake's cash cycle is 75 days.
       Let's take a look at the accounts receivable turnover ratio, which helps assess that element of the cash
       conversion cycle.
       Accounts Receivable Turnover Ratio
       Receivables ratios show company performance in relation to current receivables (what is due from customers),
       as well as credit policy effect on sales growth. One receivables ratio is called the accounts receivable
       turnover ratio.This ratio determines how many times (i.e., how often) accounts receivable are collected
       during a year and converted to cash. A higher number of times indicates that receivables are collected quickly.
       This quick cash collection may be viewed as a positive occurrence because liquidity improves, and the
       company may reinvest in its business sooner when the value of the dollar has more buying power (time value
       of money). The higher number of times may also be a negative occurrence, signaling that credit extension
       terms are too tight, and it may exclude qualified consumers from purchasing. Excluding these customers
       means that they may take their business to a competitor, thus reducing potential sales.
       In contrast, a lower number of times indicates that receivables are collected at a slower rate. A slower
       collection rate could signal that lending terms are too lenient; management might consider tightening lending
       opportunities and more aggressively pursuing payment from its customers. The lower turnover also shows
       that the company has cash tied up in receivables longer, thus hindering its ability to reinvest this cash in other
       current projects. The lower turnover rate may signal a high level of bad debt accounts. The determination of a
       high or low turnover rate really depends on the standards of the company's industry. It's key to note the
       tradeoff in adjusting credit terms. Loose credit terms may attract more customers but may also increase bad
       debt expense. Tighter credit terms may attract fewer customers but may also reduce bad debt expense.
       The formula for accounts receivable turnover is

       Net credit sales are sales made on credit only; cash sales are not included because they do not produce
       receivables. However, many companies do not report credit sales separately from cash sales, so "net sales"
       may be substituted for "net credit sales" in this case. Beginning and ending accounts receivable refer to the

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                             6.2 · Operating Efficiency Ratios 169

beginning and ending balances in accounts receivable for the period. The beginning accounts receivable
balance is the same figure as the ending accounts receivable balance from the prior period.
When computing the accounts receivable turnover for Clear Lake Sporting Goods, let's assume net credit sales
make up $100,000 of the $120,000 of the net sales found on the income statement in the current year.

To gain a better understanding of its ratio performance, Clear Lake Sporting Goods can compare its turnover
to industry averages, key competitors, and its own historical ratios. Given this outcome, the managers may
want to consider stricter credit lending practices to make sure credit customers are of a higher quality. They
may also need to be more aggressive with collecting any outstanding accounts.

 THINK IT THROUGH
 Accounts Receivable Turnover

  You are a consultant assessing cash management practices for two firms, Company A and Company B (see
  Figure 6.3).

            Figure 6.3 Financial Information for Company A and Company B

Based on the information provided, do the following:

· Compute the accounts receivable turnover ratio.
· Interpret the outcomes, indicating how each company is performing

Solution:

Company A:  times, Company B:                         times. Upon initial review of this limited

information, Company A seems to be performing better since its turnover ratio is higher. Accounts

receivable turnover has a significant impact on cash flows. One might want more information on trends for

each company with these ratios and a comparison to others in the same industry. More information is

helpful in assessing performance.

LINK TO LEARNING

American Superconductor Corporation

American Superconductor Corporation specializes in the production and service of energy-efficient wind
turbine systems, as well as energy grid construction solutions. On the company's 2019 financial statement
(https://openstax.org/r/financial-statement), the accounts receivable turnover ratio is approximately 6.32
times.
170 6 · Measures of Financial Health

      Total Asset Turnover

       Total asset turnover measures the ability of a company to use its assets to generate revenues. A company
       would like to use as few assets as possible to generate the most net sales. Therefore, a higher total asset
       turnover means the company is using their assets very efficiently to produce net sales. The formula for total
       asset turnover is

       Average total assets are found by dividing the sum of beginning and ending total assets balances found on the
       balance sheet. The beginning total assets balance in the current year is taken from the ending total assets
       balance in the prior year.
       Clear Lake Sporting Goods' total asset turnover is

       The outcome of 0.53 means that for every $1 of assets, $0.53 of net sales are generated. Over time, Clear Lake
       Sporting Goods would like to see this turnover ratio increase.

      Inventory Turnover

       Inventory turnover measures how many times during the year a company has sold and replaced inventory.
       This can tell a company how well inventory is managed. A higher ratio is preferable; however, an extremely
       high turnover may mean that the company does not have enough inventory available to meet demand. A low
       turnover may mean the company has too much supply of inventory on hand. The formula for inventory
       turnover is

       Cost of goods sold for the current year is found on the income statement. Average inventory is found by
       dividing the sum of beginning and ending inventory balances found on the balance sheet. The beginning
       inventory balance in the current year is taken from the ending inventory balance in the prior year.
       Clear Lake Sporting Goods' inventory turnover is

       A ratio of 1.6 times seems to be a very low turnover rate for Clear Lake Sporting Goods. This may mean the
       company is maintaining too high an inventory supply to meet a low demand from customers. Managers may
       want to decrease their on-hand inventory to free up more liquid assets to use in other ways. Keep in mind,
       ratios should not be taken out of context. One ratio alone can't tell the whole story. Ratios should be used with
       caution and in conjunction with other ratios and additional financial and contextual information.
       As with accounts receivable, there is a trade-off to consider in managing inventory. Low turnover will usually

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                             6.2 · Operating Efficiency Ratios 171

mean a low risk of stockouts and the ability to carry more of what customers are looking for. But high
inventory levels will mean that more cash is tied up in inventory. High turnover will mean carrying less
inventory and the higher risk of stockouts, causing customers to go elsewhere to find what they need.

Figure 6.4 Inventory turnover can help determine how well a company manages its inventory. (credit: "Untitled" by Marcin Wichary/
flickr, CC BY 2.0)

 LINK TO LEARNING
 Target Corporation

  As we have learned, the inventory turnover ratio shows how well a company manages its inventory. Look
  through the financial statements in the 2019 Annual Report for Target (https://openstax.org/r/annual-
  report-for-target) and calculate the inventory turnover ratio. What does the outcome mean for Target?

Days' Sales in Inventory

Days' sales in inventory expresses the number of days it takes a company to turn inventory into sales. The
fewer the number of days, the more quickly the company can sell its inventory. The greater the number of
days, the longer it takes to sell its inventory. The formula for days' sales in inventory is

Clear Lake Sporting Goods' days' sales in inventory is

Depending on the industry, 243 days may be a long time to sell inventory. While industry dictates what is an
acceptable number of days to sell inventory, 243 days is likely to be unsustainable long-term. Remember, it's
important to not take one ratio out of context. Review the ratio in conjunction with other ratios and other
financial data. For example, we might review the days' sales in inventory along with accounts receivable
turnover for Clear Lake Sporting Goods relative to the industry average to get a better picture of Clear Lake's
performance in this area.
172 6 · Measures of Financial Health

      6.3 Liquidity Ratios

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Calculate current, quick, and cash ratios to assess a firm's liquidity and make informed business decisions.
         · Assess organizational performance using liquidity ratios.

       Liquidity refers to the business's ability to manage current assets or convert assets into cash in order to meet
       short-term cash needs, another aspect of a firm's financial health. Examples of the most liquid assets include
       cash, accounts receivable, and inventory for merchandising or manufacturing businesses. The reason these
       are among the most liquid assets is that these assets will be turned into cash more quickly than land or
       buildings, for example. Accounts receivable represents goods or services that have already been sold and will
       typically be paid/collected within 30 to 45 days.
       Inventory is less liquid than accounts receivable because the product must first be sold before it generates
       cash (either through a cash sale or sale on account). Inventory is, however, more liquid than land or buildings
       because, under most circumstances, it is easier and quicker for a business to find someone to purchase its
       goods than it is to find a buyer for land or buildings.

      Current Ratio

       The current ratio is closely related to working capital; it represents the current assets divided by current
       liabilities. The current ratio utilizes the same amounts as working capital (current assets and current liabilities)
       but presents the amount in ratio, rather than dollar, form. That is, the current ratio is defined as current
       assets/current liabilities. The interpretation of the current ratio is similar to working capital. A ratio of greater
       than one indicates that the firm has the ability to meet short-term obligations with a buffer, while a ratio of
       less than one indicates that the firm should pay close attention to the composition of its current assets as well
       as the timing of the current liabilities.

       The current ratio in the current year for Clear Lake Sporting Goods is

       A 2:1 ratio means the company has twice as many current assets as current liabilities; typically, this would be
       plenty to cover obligations. A 2:1 ratio is actually quite high for most companies and most industries. Again,
       it's recommended that ratios be used in conjunction with one another. An analyst would likely look at the high
       current ratio and low accounts receivable turnover to begin asking questions about management
       performance, as this might indicate a trouble area (high inventory and slow collections).

       LINK TO LEARNING

       Target Corporation

         As we have learned, the current ratio shows how well a company can cover short-term liabilities with short-
         term assets. Look through the balance sheet in the 2019 Annual Report for Target (https://openstax.org/r/
         annual-report-for-target) and calculate the current ratio. What does the outcome mean for Target?

      Quick Ratio

       The quick ratio, also known as the acid-test ratio, is similar to the current ratio except current assets are more
       narrowly defined as the most liquid assets, which exclude inventory and prepaid expenses. The conversion of

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              6.3 · Liquidity Ratios 173

inventory and prepaid expenses to cash can sometimes take more time than the liquidation of other current
assets. A company will want to know what it has on hand and can use quickly if an immediate obligation is
due. The formula for the quick ratio is

The quick ratio for Clear Lake Sporting Goods in the current year is

A 1.6:1 ratio means the company has enough quick assets to cover current liabilities. It's again key to note that
a single ratio shouldn't be used out of context. A 1.6 ratio is difficult to interpret on its own. Industry averages
and trend analysis for Clear Lake Sporting Goods would also be helpful in giving the ratio more meaning.

 LINK TO LEARNING
 Target Corporation

  As we have learned, the quick ratio shows how quickly a company can liquidate current assets to cover
  current liabilities. Look through the financial statements in the 2019 Annual Report for Target
  (https://openstax.org/r/annual-report-for-target) and calculate the quick ratio. What does the outcome
  mean for Target?

Cash Ratio

Cash is the most liquid asset a company has, and cash ratio is often used by investors and lenders to asses an
organization's liquidity. It represents the firm's cash and cash equivalents divided by current liabilities and is a
more conservative look at a firm's liquidity than the current or quick ratios. The ratio is reflected as a number,
not a percentage. A cash ratio of 1.0 means the firm has enough cash to cover all current liabilities if
something happened and it was required to pay all current debts immediately. A ratio of less than 1.0 means
the firm has more current liabilities than it has cash on hand. A ratio of more than 1.0 means it has enough
cash on hand to pay all current liabilities and still have cash left over. While a ratio greater than 1.0 may sound
ideal, it's important to consider the specifics of the company. Sitting on idle cash is not ideal, as the cash could
be used to earn a return. And having a ratio less than 1.0 isn't always bad, as many firms operate quite
successfully with a ratio of less than 1.0. Comparing the company ratio with trend analysis and with industry
averages will help provide more insight.

The cash ratio for Clear Lake Sporting Goods in the current year is:

A 1.1 ratio means the company has enough cash to cover current liabilities.
174 6 · Measures of Financial Health

        Figure 6.5 Cash is the most liquid asset a company has and is often used by investors and lenders to assess an organization's
        liquidity. (credit: "20 US Dollar" by Jack Sem/flickr CC BY 2.0)

      6.4 Solvency Ratios

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Evaluate organizational solvency using the debt-to-assets and debt-to-equity ratios.
         · Calculate the times interest earned ratio to assess a firm's ability to cover interest expense on debt as it
             comes due.

       Solvency implies that a company can meet its long-term obligations and will likely stay in business in the
       future. Meeting long-term obligations includes the ability to pay any interest incurred on long-term debt. Two
       main solvency ratios are the debt-to-equity ratio and the times interest earned ratio.

      Debt-to-Assets Ratio

       The debt-to-assets ratio shows the relationship between debt and assets. It reflects how much of the assets
       of the business was financed through debt. It reflects the company's leverage and is helpful to analysts in
       comparing how leveraged one company is compared to another.
       Debts normally carry interest expense and must be repaid. The debt-to-assets ratio includes all debt--both
       long-term debt and current liabilities. The formula for the debt-to-assets ratio is

       The information needed to compute the debt-to-assets ratio for Clear Lake Sporting Goods in the current year
       can be found on the balance sheet. The debt-to-assets ratio for Clear Lake Sporting Goods in the current year
       is

       This means that 60 percent of Clear Lake's assets are financed by debt. We can also then infer that the other
       40 percent is financed by equity. A ratio higher than 1.0 means the company has more debts than assets,
       which means it has negative equity. In Clear Lake's case, a 60 percent debt-to-assets ratio indicates some risk,
       but perhaps not a high risk. Comparing Clear Lake's ratio to industry averages would provide better insight.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              6.4 · Solvency Ratios 175

 LINK TO LEARNING

 Target Corporation

  As we have learned, the debt-to-assets ratio shows the relationship between a firm's debt and assets. Look
  through the financial statements in the 2019 Annual Report for Target (https://openstax.org/r/annual-
  report-for-target) and calculate the debt-to-assets ratio. What does the outcome mean for Target?

Debt-to-Equity Ratio

The debt-to-equity ratio shows the relationship between debt and equity as it relates to business financing. A
company can take out loans, issue stock, and retain earnings to be used in future periods to keep operations
running. A key difference in debt and equity is the interest expense repayment that a loan carries as opposed
to equity, which does not have this requirement. Therefore, a company wants to know how much debt and
equity contribute to its financing. The formula for the debt-to-equity ratio is

The information needed to compute the debt-to-equity ratio for Clear Lake Sporting Goods in the current year
can be found on the balance sheet.

This means that for every one dollar of equity contributed toward financing, $1.50 is contributed from lenders.
Recall that total assets equal total liabilities plus total equity. Both the debt-to-assets and debt-to-equity ratio
have total liabilities in the numerator. The difference in the two ratios is the denominator. The denominator for
the debt-to-equity ratio is total stockholder equity. The denominator for the debt-to-assets ratio is total assets,
or total liabilities plus total equity. Thus, the two ratios contain the same information, making calculating both
ratios redundant. A financial analyst may prefer to calculate one ratio over the other because of the format of
readily available industry data to use for comparison purposes or for consistency with other calculations the
analyst is performing.

THINK IT THROUGH

Financing a Business Expansion

You are the CFO of a small corporation. The president, who is one of five shareholders, has created an
innovative new product that is testing well with substantial demand. To begin manufacturing, $400,000 is
needed to acquire the equipment. The corporation's balance sheet shows total assets of $2,400,000 and
total liabilities of $600,000. Most of the liabilities relate to debt that carries a covenant requiring that the
company maintain a debt-to-equity ratio not exceeding 0.50. Determine the effect that each of the two
options of obtaining additional capital will have on the debt covenant.

Solution:

We know the total liabilities for the firm to be $600,000. Using the accounting equation, we can find that the

firm has $1,800,000 in equity.                current debt-to-equity ratio of 0.33, which is well

below the requirement for the debt covenant. If the firm issues debt, the ratio changes to

                  , which is 0.55 and would violate the debt covenant. If the firm chooses to issue

additional stock, the new debt-to-equity ratio would be  , which is 0.27. This is well

below the requirements in the debt covenant.
176 6 · Measures of Financial Health

      Times Interest Earned (TIE) Ratio

       The times interest earned (TIE) ratio measures the company's ability to pay interest expense on all debt
       incurred. This ability to pay is determined by the available earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) are
       deducted. These earnings are considered the operating income. Lenders will pay attention to this ratio before
       extending credit. The more times over a company can cover interest, the more likely a lender will extend long-
       term credit. The formula for times interest earned is

       The information needed to compute times interest earned for Clear Lake Sporting Goods in the current year
       can be found on the income statement.

       The $43,000 is the operating income, representing earnings before interest and taxes. The 21.5 times outcome
       suggests that Clear Lake Sporting Goods can easily repay interest on an outstanding loan and creditors would
       have little risk that Clear Lake Sporting Goods would be unable to pay.

       LINK TO LEARNING
       Times Interest Earned

         This video about times interest earned (https://openstax.org/r/video-about-times) explains how to
         calculate it and why the ratio is useful, and it provides an example.

      6.5 Market Value Ratios

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Calculate earnings per share to determine the portion of profit allocated to each outstanding share of
             common stock.
         · Evaluate firm value using the price/earnings ratio and book value per share.

       In this section we will turn our attention to market value ratios, measures used to assess a firm's overall
       market price. Common ratios used include earnings per share, the price/earnings ratio, and book value per
       share.

      Earnings per Share (EPS)

       Earnings per share (EPS) measures the portion of a corporation's profit allocated to each outstanding share
       of common stock. An increasing earnings per share can drive up a stock price. Conversely, falling earnings per
       share can lower a stock's market price. Earnings per share is also a component in calculating the price-to-
       earnings ratio (the market price of the stock divided by its earnings per share), which many investors find to
       be a key indicator of the value of a company's stock.
       It's key to note, however, that EPS, like any ratio, should be used with caution and in tandem with other ratios
       and contextual data. Many financial professionals choose not to rely on income statement data and, similarly,
       EPS because they feel the cash flow statement provides more reliable and insightful information.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                       6.5 · Market Value Ratios 177

 CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

 Alibaba Group Earnings Announcements Continue to Exceed Market Expectations

  Alibaba, a Chinese-based company traded in the United States, exceeded market expectations in 2020
  quarterly earnings releases. In the November 2020 earnings release, Alibaba reported earnings per share of
  17.97 yuan versus market estimates of 14.33. Despite many companies struggling due to the pandemic,
  Alibaba reported strong earnings as a result of the surge in online shopping and remote work.

  (sources: "Alibaba Beats Estimates as Pandemic Fuels Online, Cloud Computing Demand." CNBC. August
  20, 2020. https://www.cnbc.com/2020/08/20/alibaba-beats-quarterly-revenue-estimates.html; Emily Bary.
  "Alibaba Earnings Top Expectations as Pandemic Drives Increased Digital Purchases. Market Watch. August
  20, 2020. https://www.marketwatch.com/story/alibaba-earnings-top-expectations-as-pandemic-drives-
  increased-digital-purchases-2020-08-20; Matthew Johnston. "Alibaba Earnings: What Happened."
  Investopedia. November 5, 2020. https://www.investopedia.com/alibaba-q2-2021-earnings-5085444; Chris
  Versace. "Why S&P 500 EPS Expectations Showcase the Need for Thematic Investing." Tematica Research.
  June 3, 2020. https://www.tematicaresearch.com/why-sp-500-eps-expectations-showcase-the-need-for-
  thematic-investing)

Calculating Earnings per Share

Earnings per share is the profit a company earns for each of its outstanding common shares. Both the balance
sheet and income statement are needed to calculate earnings per share. The balance sheet provides details on
the preferred dividend rate, the total par value of the preferred stock, and the number of common shares
outstanding. The income statement indicates the net income for the period. The formula to calculate basic
earnings per share is

By removing the preferred dividends from net income, the numerator represents the profit available to
common shareholders. Because preferred dividends represent the amount of net income to be distributed to
preferred shareholders, this portion of the income is obviously not available for common shareholders. While
a number of variations of measuring a company's profit, such as NOPAT (net operating profit after taxes) and
EBITDA (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization), are used in the financial world, GAAP
requires companies to calculate earnings per share based on a corporation's net income, as this amount
appears directly on a company's income statement, which for public companies must be audited.

In the denominator, only common shares are used to determine earnings per share because earnings per
share is a measure of earnings for each common share of stock. The denominator can fluctuate throughout
the year as a company issues and buys back shares of its own stock. The weighted average number of shares
is used on the denominator because of this fluctuation. To illustrate, assume that a corporation began the year
with 600 shares of common stock outstanding and then on April 1 issued 1,000 more shares. During the period
January 1 to March 31, the company had the original 600 shares outstanding. Once the new shares were
issued, the company had the original 600 plus the new 1,000 shares, for a total of 1,600 shares for each of the
next nine months--from April 1 to December 31. To determine the weighted average shares, apply these
fractional weights to both of the stock amounts (see Figure 6.6).
178 6 · Measures of Financial Health

                                                                                  Figure 6.6 Weighted Shares

       If the shares were not weighted, the calculation would not consider the time period during which the shares
       were outstanding.
       To illustrate how earnings per share is calculated, assume Clear Lake Sporting Goods earns $35,000 in net
       income during the current year. During the year, the company also declared a $5,000 dividend on preferred
       stock and a $6,000 dividend on common stock. The company had 8,000 common shares outstanding the entire
       year. Clear Lake Sporting Goods has generated $3.75 of earnings ($35,000 less the $5,000 of preferred
       dividends) for each of the 8,000 common shares of stock it has outstanding.

       Measuring Performance with Earnings per Share
       Earnings per share is a key profitability measure that both current and potential common stockholders
       monitor. Its importance is accentuated by the fact that GAAP requires public companies to report earnings per
       share on the face of a company's income statement. This is the only ratio that requires such prominent
       reporting. If fact, public companies are required to report two different earnings per share amounts on their
       income statements--basic and diluted. We've illustrated the calculation of basic earnings per share. Diluted
       earnings per share, which is not demonstrated here, involves the consideration of all securities, such as stocks
       and bonds, that could potentially dilute, or reduce, the basic earnings per share.

       LINK TO LEARNING
       Finding Earning per Share for Public Companies

         Where can you find earnings per share information on public companies? Use the Yahoo! Finance
         (https://openstax.org/r/yahoo-finance) website to look up stock and earnings per share data for Tellurian
         Inc. (TELL), Amazon (AMZN), or CVS Pharmacy (CVS). Or use the search function to search for earnings per
         share data for your favorite corporation. Enter the ticker for the company you are looking up, and a basic
         chart and graph will display with stock price data along with several commonly used ratios (including
         earnings per share).
         As you review data, keep in mind that a company can manipulate or impact its earnings per share by
         issuing new shares or buying back issued shares. What are the ethical implications of earnings per share
         calculations?

       Common stock shares are normally purchased by investors to generate income through dividends or to sell at
       a profit in the future. Investors realize that inadequate earnings per share can result in poor or inconsistent
       dividend payments and fluctuating stock prices. As such, companies seek to produce earnings per share
       amounts that rise each period. However, an increase in earnings per share may not always reflect favorable
       performance, as there are multiple reasons that earnings per share may increase. One way earnings per share
       can increase is through increased net income. On the other hand, it can also increase when a company buys
       back its own shares of stock.
       For example, assume that Clear Lake Sporting Goods generated net income of $30,000 and paid out $3,000 in

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                       6.5 · Market Value Ratios 179

preferred shareholder dividends last year. In addition, 10,550 shares of common stock were outstanding
throughout the entire year. In January of the current year, the company buys back shares of its common stock
and holds them as treasury shares, making its current weighted average shares outstanding for this year
8,000. Net income for the current year is $35,000, $5,000 of which was paid to preferred shareholders in
dividends. In the prior year, the company's earnings per share was

Clear Lake Sporting Goods' current year earnings per share is

The purchase of treasury stock in the current year reduces the common shares outstanding to 8,000 because
treasury shares are considered issued but not outstanding. Earnings per share for the current year is now
$3.75 per share even though earnings only increased by $5,000. It's key to note the impact of purchasing
treasury stock and the intentions in doing so. Treasury stock is commonly purchased for a variety of reasons,
but doing so to intentionally manipulate earnings per should not be a primary reason.
This increase in earnings per share occurred because the net income is now spread over fewer shares of stock.
Similarly, earnings per share can decline even when a company's net income increases if the number of shares
increases at a higher degree than net income.

 CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

 Stock Buybacks Can Drive Up Earnings per Share: Ethical?

  As many companies struggled to make ends meet or meet their cash flow needs amid the COVID-19
  pandemic, some companies continued to thrive. Apple continued to have a healthy financial position with
  ample cash supply. It repurchased $18.5 billion of its own stock in the second quarter of 2020.1 The total
  stock buyback over the preceding five years was $282.87 billion, which is 3.5 times higher than any other
  company. Since the earnings per share calculation is earnings divided by average outstanding shares, the
  fewer shares there are outstanding, the higher earnings per share goes without the firm having to actually
  raise earnings.
  What do you think? Did Apple act ethically in repurchasing large quantities of its own shares? Is it ethical
  for any company to do so? If you were an investor or analyst, what questions would you ask or what
  cautions would you take in assessing and comparing earnings per share data?
  (sources: Wayne Duggan. "7 S&P 500 Companies with Stock Buybacks." US News & World Report.
  December 14, 2020. https://money.usnews.com/investing/stock-market-news/slideshows/s-
  p-500-companies-with-stock-buybacks?slide=2; "Apple's $460 Billion Stock Buyback." Above Avalon. April
  23, 2020. https://www.aboveavalon.com/notes/2020/4/23/apples-460-billion-stock-buyback; "Apple Stock
  Buybacks (Quarterly)." Ycharts. n.d. https://ycharts.com/companies/AAPL/stock_buyback)

 LINK TO LEARNING

 Stock Buybacks

  This Wall Street Journal video about stock buybacks (https://openstax.org/r/video-about-stock-buybacks)

1 Bill Maurer. "Apple: New Highs Seem Likely." Seeking Alpha. May 11, 2020. https://seekingalpha.com/article/4346246-apple-new-
highs-seem-likely
180 6 · Measures of Financial Health

         explains the various perspectives on the subject. It walks through the basic concepts of how buybacks work
         and explores some viewpoints on whether buybacks are good, bad, or otherwise.

       To put a firm's earnings per share into perspective and allow for a more meaningful analysis, earnings per
       share is often tracked over a number of years, such as when presented in the comparative income statements
       for Clear Lake Sporting Goods (see Figure 6.7).

        Figure 6.7 Comparative Year-End Income Statements Earnings per share year after year can be a good indication of a company's
        financial health.

       Most analysts believe that a consistent improvement in earnings per share year after year is an indication of
       continuous improvement in the earning power of a company. This is what is seen in Clear Lake Sporting
       Goods' earnings per share amounts over each of the three years reported, moving from $2.21 to $2.56 to
       $3.75. However, it is important to remember that earnings per share is calculated on historical data, which is
       not always predictive of the future.

       THINK IT THROUGH
       Would You Have Invested?

         What if, in 1997, you invested $5,000 in Amazon? Today, your investment would be worth nearly $6 million.
         Potential investors viewing Amazon's income statement in 1997 would have seen earnings per share of
         negative $1.27. In other words, Amazon lost $1.27 for each share of common stock outstanding. Would you
         have invested?
         Solution:
         Answers will vary. A strong response would include the idea that a negative or small earnings per share
         reflects upon the historical operations of a company. Earnings per share does not predict the future.
         Investors in 1997 looked beyond Amazon's profitability and saw its business model having strong future
         potential.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                       6.5 · Market Value Ratios 181

Price/Earnings (P/E) Ratio

The price/earnings (P/E) ratio measures the current market share price of a company's stock relative to its
earnings per share (EPS). The ratio is helpful in comparing performance and stock price of a company to other
companies. It's also helpful in evaluating how much investors are willing to pay for earnings performance.
Investors, in particular, use this ratio and rely on two key characteristics: past performance (trailing) and
future estimates (forward). Trailing data can be calculated but is also easily found online, as it's a common
measure reported on financial sites. Investors will often look for P/E TTM, which is the price/earnings ratio for
the trailing 12 months (last year worth of earnings data). This helps investors assess one day's stock price
relative to the earnings per share over the past 12 months. P/E ratio is widely used by investors to determine if
a stock is over- or undervalued. It also helps them compare one firm to that of the industry average or index,
such as the S&P 500.

In the prior section we saw earnings per share data for Clear Lake Sporting Goods. Using its current year
earnings per share of $3.75 and the current stock price of $69.41, we can calculate price/earnings ratio for
Clear Lake Sporting Goods:

An 18.51 ratio means an investor would expect to invest $18.51 to gain $1 of earnings.

Book Value per Share

Book value per share is often used hand in hand with market value per share. Investors compare the two in
order to see if the stock is possibly over- or undervalued. Book value is derived from accounting practices and
shows the value of the firm on paper. Market value, on the other hand, is determined by supply and demand,
based on what investors are willing to pay for the stock. If the market value per share is higher than the book
value, the stock is considered overvalued. If the market value is lower than the book value, it's considered
undervalued.
In theory, book value per share represents the total value common shareholders would receive if the firm
were liquidated. It is total equity less preferred equity, spread across the total shares outstanding. The formula
to calculate book value per share is

The book value per share for Clear Lake Sporting Goods is

If investors compared the book value per share of $10.00 for Clear Lake Sporting Goods to the P/E ratio of
$18.51, they would likely conclude that the stock was undervalued in the year of analysis.

 LINK TO LEARNING

 Book Value versus Market Value of Shares

  This video about book value and market value (https://openstax.org/r/video-about-book-value) explains
  the basic concepts and discusses how the two differ. Samples of the concept are then explored using Apple
  Inc. as an example.
182 6 · Measures of Financial Health

      6.6 Profitability Ratios and the DuPont Method

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Calculate profit margin to determine how much sales revenues the firm has translated into income.
         · Evaluate firm performance by calculating return on total assets and return on equity.
         · Analyze organizational performance using DuPont method calculations.

       Profitability considers how well a company produces returns given its operational performance. The company
       needs to use its assets and operations efficiently to increase profit. To assist with profit goal attainment,
       company revenues need to outweigh expenses. Let's consider three profitability measurements and ratios:
       profit margin, return on total assets, and return on equity.

      Profit Margin

       Profit margin represents how much of sales revenue has translated into income. This ratio shows how much
       of each $1 of sales is returned as profit. The larger the ratio figure (the closer it gets to 1), the more of each
       sales dollar is returned as profit. The portion of the sales dollar not returned as profit goes toward expenses.
       The formula for profit margin is

       For Clear Lake Sporting Goods, the profit margin in the current year is

       This means that for every dollar of sales, $0.29 returns as profit. If Clear Lake Sporting Goods thinks this is too
       low, the company would try to find ways to reduce expenses and increase sales.

      Return on Total Assets

       The return on total assets measures the company's ability to use its assets successfully to generate a profit.
       The higher the return (ratio outcome), the more profit is created from asset use. Average total assets are
       found by dividing the sum of beginning and ending total assets balances found on the balance sheet. The
       beginning total assets balance in the current year is taken from the ending total assets balance in the prior
       year. The formula for return on total assets is

       For Clear Lake Sporting Goods, the return on total assets for the current year is

       The higher the figure, the better the company is using its assets to create a profit. Industry standards can
       dictate what an acceptable return is.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                    6.6 · Profitability Ratios and the DuPont Method 183

 LINK TO LEARNING
 Return on Assets

  This video explains how to calculate return on assets (https://openstax.org/r/video-explains-how-to-
  calculate) and how to interpret the results. The video provides the formula, a discussion of the concept, and
  the importance of the ratio.

Return on Equity

Return on equity measures the company's ability to use its invested capital to generate income. The invested
capital comes from stockholders' investments in the company's stock and its retained earnings and is
leveraged to create profit. The higher the return, the better the company is doing at using its investments to
yield a profit. The formula for return on equity is

Average stockholders' equity is found by dividing the sum of beginning and ending stockholders' equity
balances found on the balance sheet. The beginning stockholders' equity balance in the current year is taken
from the ending stockholders' equity balance in the prior year. Keep in mind that the net income is calculated
after preferred dividends have been paid.
For Clear Lake Sporting Goods, we will use the net income figure and deduct the preferred dividends that have
been paid. The return on equity for the current year is

The higher the figure, the better the company is using its investments to create a profit. Industry standards
can dictate what an acceptable return is.

The DuPont Method

ROE in its basic form is useful; however, there are really three components of ROE: operating efficiency (profit
margin), asset usage (total asset turnover), and leverage (equity ratio). This is known as the DuPont method.
It originated in 1919 when the DuPont company implemented it for internal measurement purposes.2 The
DuPont method can be expressed using this formula:

Profit margin indicates how much profit is generated by each dollar of sales and is computed as shown:

Total asset turnover indicates the number of sales dollars produced by every dollar invested in capital
assets--in other words, how efficiently the company is using its capital assets to generate sales. It is computed
as shown:

2 Joshua Kennon. "What Is the DuPont Method Return on Equity, or ROE, Formula?" The Balance. December 16, 2020.
https://thebalance.com/the-dupont-model-return-on-equity-formula-for-beginners-357494
184 6 · Measures of Financial Health

       The equity multiplier measures leverage. It is computed as shown:

       Using DuPont analysis, investors can see overall performance broken down into smaller pieces, which helps
       them better understand what is driving ROE. We already have the computations for Clear Lake Sporting
       Goods' profit margin and total asset turnover:

       We can calculate the equity multiplier using the equity multiplier equation and prior calculations for Clear
       Lake's average total assets and average stockholder equity:

       Now that we have all three elements, we can complete the DuPont analysis for Clear Lake Sporting Goods:

       LINK TO LEARNING
       The DuPont Method

         This video about the DuPont method (https://openstax.org/r/video-about-DuPont-method) walks through
         its history, discusses its basic components, and shows how to calculate and interpret each measurement.

       Performance Analysis
       ROE captures the nuances of all three elements. A good sales margin and a proper asset turnover are both
       needed for a successful operation. Like all ratios, assessing performance is relative. It's important to look at
       the ratio in context of the organization, its history, and the industry. If we compare Clear Lake's ROE of 26.4%
       to the recreational products industry average of 12.56% for the same year, it would appear as though Clear
       Lake Sporting Goods is outperforming the general industry. However, recreational products can include a wide
       variety of businesses beyond just the outdoor gear in which Clear Lake Sporting Goods specializes. An analyst
       could look at other key competitors such as Cabela's or Bass Pro Shops to get even more relevant
       comparisons.
       Clear Lake Sporting Goods is also technically a retail store, albeit a specialized one. An analyst might also
       consider the industry averages for general or online retail of 20.64% and 27.05%, respectively. Compared to
       the broader retail industry, Clear Lake Sporting Goods is still performing well, but its performance is not as

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                  6.6 · Profitability Ratios and the DuPont Method 185

disparate to industry average as when compared to recreational products (see Table 6.1).

                Industry          ROE (%)

Advertising                       2.93

Air Transportation                -47.03

Computer Services                 13.50

Banking                           8.22

Financial Services (nonbanking)   64.28

Food Processing                   10.12

Renewable Energy                  -20.59

Hospitals/Health Care Facilities  70.64

Hotels/Gaming                     -30.40

Publishers                        -14.18

Recreational Products             12.56

Real Estate (general)             2.00

Retail:                           0.00

Automotive                        36.28

Building Supply                   0.27

General                           20.64

Grocery                           30.63

Online                            27.05

Rubber and Tires                  -26.69

Shoes                             23.70

Software (systems and applications) 28.09

Transportation                    21.47

Total Market Average              8.25

Table 6.1 Return on Equity by Industry in 2020 It's
important to look at any ratio in context of the organization,
its history, and the industry. (data source: Aswath
Damodaran Online)
186 6 · Summary

     Summary

6.1 Ratios: Condensing Information into Smaller Pieces

Ratios used in financial analysis can help investors and other analysts identify trends over time, compare
companies to one another, and make informed decisions about a company. There are, however, limitations to
analysis, so it should be used wisely and in conjunction with other contextual information available.

6.2 Operating Efficiency Ratios

Efficiency ratios measure how well management uses the assets of the organization to earn a profit. Common
efficiency ratios include accounts receivable turnover, total asset turnover, inventory turnover, and days' sales
in inventory.

6.3 Liquidity Ratios

Liquidity ratios help analysts measure how well an organization can meet its short-term obligations (liabilities)
as they come due. Common ratios to measure liquidity include the current ratio, the quick ratio, and the cash
ratio. Each of these three ratios includes more (cash ratio) or less liquid (current ratio) current assets in its
measure of liquidity.

6.4 Solvency Ratios

Solvency ratios measure how well an organization can meet its long-term obligations (liabilities) as they come
due, or in more general terms, its ability to stay in business. Common solvency ratios include the debt-to-
assets ratio and the debt-to-equity ratio.

6.5 Market Value Ratios

Market value ratios help analysts assess the value of publicly traded firms in the market. The most commonly
used market value ratios include earnings per share (EPS), the price/earnings ratio, and book value per share.

6.6 Profitability Ratios and the DuPont Method

Profitability ratios help measure how effectively the organization earns a profit. Common profitability ratios
include profit margin, return on total assets, and return on equity. The DuPont method breaks down return on
equity into three smaller components for a more thorough assessment of performance: profit margin, total
asset turnover, and an equity multiplier.

     Key Terms

accounts receivable turnover ratio measures how many times in a period (usually a year) a company will
    collect cash from accounts receivable

book value per share total book value (assets - liabilities) of a firm expressed on a per-share basis
cash ratio represents the firm's cash and cash equivalents divided by current liabilities; often used by

    investors and lender to asses an organization's liquidity
current ratio current assets divided by current liabilities; used to determine a company's liquidity (ability to

    meet short-term obligations)
days' sales in inventory the number of days it takes a company to turn inventory into sales
debt-to-assets ratio measures the portion of debt used by a company relative to the amount of assets
debt-to-equity ratio measures the portion of debt used by a company relative to the amount of

    stockholders' equity
DuPont method framework for financial analysis that breaks return on equity down into smaller elements
earnings per share (EPS) measures the portion of a corporation's profit allocated to each outstanding share

    of common stock
efficiency ratios ratios that show how well a company uses and manages its assets

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           6 · CFA Institute 187

inventory turnover measures the number of times an average quantity of inventory was bought and sold
    during the period

liquidity ability to convert assets into cash in order to meet primarily short-term cash needs or emergencies
market value ratios measures used to assess a firm's overall market price
operating cycle amount of time it takes a company to use its cash to provide a product or service and collect

    payment from the customer
price/earnings (P/E) ratio company's stock price divided by the company's earnings per share; indicates the

    amount investors are willing to pay for one dollar of earnings
profit margin represents how much of sales revenue has translated into income
quick ratio also known as the acid test ratio; ratio used to determine a firm's ability to pay short-term debts

    using its most liquid assets
return on equity measures the company's ability to use its invested capital to generate income
return on total assets measures the company's ability to use its assets successfully to generate a profit
solvency implies that a company can meet its long-term obligations and will likely stay in business in the

    future
times interest earned (TIE) ratio measures the company's ability to pay interest expense on long-term debt

    incurred
total asset turnover measures the ability of a company to use its assets to generate revenues

     CFA Institute

This chapter supports some of the Learning Outcome Statements (LOS) in this CFA® Level I Study Session
(https://openstax.org/r/cfa-study-session11). Reference with permission of CFA Institute.

     Multiple Choice

 1. Which of the following is financial statement analysis not used for?
      a. identifying trends over time
      b. benchmarking against other firms
       c. complying with SEC (Securities and Exchange Commission) regulations
      d. setting budget expectations

 2. How is converting financial data to percentages helpful in financial analysis?
      a. It makes the figures easier to calculate.
      b. It masks actual financial data so the competition can't see it.
       c. It saves time.
      d. It makes comparisons to companies of varying sizes possible.

 3. What is a common economic influence that has the potential to skew financial analysis figures?
      a. past performance
      b. inflation
       c. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
      d. benchmark data

 4. What is the formula for accounts receivable turnover?
      a. net credit sales / average accounts receivable
      b. total sales / average accounts receivable
       c. net credit sales / beginning accounts receivable
      d. net cash sales / ending accounts receivable

 5. What is the formula for the times interest earned ratio?
188 6 · Review Questions

      a. net income / interest expense
      b. earnings before interest and taxes / interest expense
       c. interest expense / earnings before interest and taxes
      d. earnings before interest and taxes - interest expense

 6. What is the formula for the calculation of earnings per share?
      a. (net income + preferred dividends) / weighted average common shares outstanding
      b. net income / weighted average common shares outstanding
       c. (net income - preferred dividends) / weighted average common shares outstanding
      d. (net income - preferred dividends) / treasury shares outstanding

 7. Most analysts believe which of the following is true about earnings per share?
      a. Consistent improvement in earnings per share year after year is an indication of continuous
           improvement in the company's earning power.
      b. Consistent improvement in earnings per share year after year is an indication of continuous decline in
           the company's earning power.
       c. Consistent improvement in earnings per share year after year is an indication of fraud within the
           company.
      d. Consistent improvement in earnings per share year after year is an indication that the company will
           never suffer a year of net loss rather than net income.

 8. What is the formula for profit margin?
      a. net sales / net income
      b. cost of goods sold / net sales
       c. sales / cost of goods sold
      d. net income / net sales

     Review Questions

 1. Is past performance considered a good indicator of future performance?

 2. The Pony Parts Tack Shop had inventory turnover of 12.8, 12.2, and 9.9 over the last three years,
     respectively. What can you learn about how well the Pony Parts management team is managing their
     inventory using this information?

 3. The Pony Parts Tack Shop had total asset turnover of 1.8., 2.1, and 2.4 over the last three years,
     respectively. What can you learn about how well the Pony Parts management team is managing their total
     assets using this information?

 4. Big Box Store Inc. had days' sales in inventory of 30, 32, and 34 for the last three years. Small Box Store
     Inc. had days' sales in inventory of 40, 38, and 36 for the last three years. What can you infer about the
     inventory management for the two companies based on this information? Which company is performing
     better?

 5. Jackson's Beef Jerky Shop has a current ratio of 2.35. What does that mean? Is 2.35 a good or bad current
     ratio?

 6. Jackson's Beef Jerky Shop has a quick ratio of 1.9. What does that mean? Is 1.9 a good or bad quick ratio?

 7. Jackson's Beef Jerky Shop has a cash ratio of 1.75. What does that mean? Is 1.75 a good or bad cash ratio?

 8. You have some funds that you would like to invest. Do some internet research to find two publicly traded
     companies in the same industry and compare their earnings per share. Would the earnings per share

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                 6 · Problems 189

     reported by each company influence your decision in selecting which company to invest in?

 9. Company A has a market value per share of 19.55 and book value per share of 12.79. If you were an
     investor, what would you conclude about the current value of Company A stock?

10. Company B has a price/earnings ratio of 21.2. The current industry average price/earnings ratio is 20.75.
      What might an investor conclude about investing in Company B?

11. What are the key elements of the DuPont formula, and how do these components function to help
      analysts assess an organization?

     Problems

 1. Sarah's Toy Shop has total sales of $100,000, net credit sales of $70,000, beginning accounts receivable of
     $20,000, and ending accounts receivable of $30,000. What is Sarah's accounts receivable turnover?
     Assume industry average is 2.9 times. How would you interpret Sarah's turnover?

 2. Fantastic Foods has total assets of $150,000, current assets of $80,000 (current assets includes $30,000 of
     cash, $10,000 of short term investments, $20,000 of accounts receivable, and $20,000 of inventory), total
     liabilities of $120,000, and current liabilities of $70,000. What is Fantastic Foods' current ratio?

 3. The Big Club has total assets of $150,000, current assets of $80,000 (current assets includes $30,000 of
     cash, $10,000 of short-term investments, $20,000 of accounts receivable, and $20,000 of inventory), total
     liabilities of $120,000, and current liabilities of $70,000. What is The Big Club's quick ratio?

 4. Giant Sales has total assets of $150,000, current assets of $80,000 (current assets includes $30,000 of cash,
     $10,000 of short-term investments, $20,000 of accounts receivable, and $20,000 of inventory), total
     liabilities of $120,000, and current liabilities of $70,000. What is Giant Sales' cash ratio?

 5. Bonita's Bread Company has total debt of $250,000 and total assets of $150,000. What is Bonita's debt-to-
     assets ratio, and what can we infer about Bonita's company using the ratio?

 6. Jai Company has total liabilities of $200,000 and total stockholder equity of $300,000. What is the debt-to-
     equity ratio for Jai Company, and what can we infer about the firm using this ratio?

 7. Jamilah's Manufacturing Company has earnings before interest and taxes of $29,000 and interest expense
     of $4,000 for the most current period. What is Jamilah's times interest earned ratio?

 8. Sarai's Sandy Beach Gear has net sales of $100,000, cost of goods sold of $60,000, and net income of
     $25,000. What is Sarai's profit margin?

 9. Bob's Tires Inc. has sales of $100,000, net income of $50,000, beginning asset balance of $200,000, ending
     asset balance of $220,000, beginning stockholder equity of $160,000, and ending stockholder equity of
     $200,000. What is Bob's return on total assets?

10. Bob's Tires Inc. has sales of $100,000, net income of $50,000, beginning asset balance of $200,000, ending
      asset balance of $220,000, beginning stockholder equity of $160,000, and ending stockholder equity of
      $200,000. What is Bob's return on equity?

     Video Activity

Ratio Analysis--Limitations of Ratios

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/ratio-analysis)
 1. In the video, Jim walks through several key limitations in the areas of reliability, comparability, relying on

     only one data source, and using information based in the past. Which limitation do you feel is the most
     worrisome? What might you do to compensate for the limitation you identified?
190 6 · Video Activity

 2. Outside of the four key areas of limitations, Jim also explores a number of key elements that ratios aren't
     able to convey. What characteristics of a firm would you most want to know about if you were to invest
     that you would not be able to glean from ratios? How would you go about gathering that information if
     you cannot get it through financial statements and ratio analysis?

The Problem with Earnings per Share (EPS)
Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/problem-with-earnings)
 3. What does Zach DeGregorio cite as the most beneficial characteristics of using EPS in financial analysis?

     And the most problematic?
 4. After watching the video and listing the key benefits and problems with EPS, how do you feel about the

     EPS calculation? Should investors use it? Why or why not? If you were going to invest a large sum of
     money in a company, would you use EPS data in your decision-making process? Why or why not?

Access for free at openstax.org
7 · Why It Matters                                                                                                               191

 7
              Time Value of Money I: Single Payment Value

Figure 7.1 Time has an impact on the value of money. (credit: modification of "Time is money" by Marco Verch/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline

  7.1 Now versus Later Concepts
  7.2 Time Value of Money (TVM) Basics
  7.3 Methods for Solving Time Value of Money Problems
  7.4 Applications of TVM in Finance

      Why It Matters

One of the single most important concepts in the study of finance is the time value of money (TVM). This
concept puts forward the idea that a dollar received today is worth more than, and therefore preferable to, a
dollar received at some point in the future. The three primary reasons for this are that (1) money received now
can be saved or invested now and earn interest or a return, resulting in more money in the future; (2) any
promise of future payments of cash will always carry the risk of default; and (3) it is simple human nature for
people to prefer making their purchases of goods and services in the present rather than waiting to make
them at some future time.

For this reason, it is important to incentivize people to give up their present consumption patterns by offering
them greater value in the future. Based on the concept of TVM, it can be said that a dollar was worth more to
us, and thus carried more value, yesterday than it is to us today. It also then follows that a dollar in our
possession right now carries a greater value for us than a dollar we might receive tomorrow or at some other
point in the future.

The entire concept of the time value of money is particularly important because it allows savers and investors
to make better-informed decisions about what to do with their money. TVM can help a person understand
which option may be best based on the critical factors of overall risk, rates of interest, inflation, and return.
TVM can also be used to help a person understand how much money they'll need to save in an interest-
bearing account in order to reach a desired financial goal, such as saving $50,000 in 10 years in an account that
earns 4% compound interest each year. TVM is the key underlying principle of such important financial
analytical activities as retirement planning, corporate capital project evaluation, and even deciding on your
192 7 · Time Value of Money I: Single Payment Value

       own personal investments and bank accounts.
       If the main concept behind the TVM is that a specific amount of money in hand now is worth more today than
       that same amount of money will be worth tomorrow, you might think that a person would be better off
       spending their money now rather than saving it for later use. However, we know that this is not always the
       case. Sometimes it is simply a better idea to save your money. While inflation can have the effect of making a
       dollar worth less tomorrow than it is worth today, the positive effect of compound interest works in favor of
       savers and investors.

      7.1 Now versus Later Concepts

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Explain why time has an impact on the value of money.
         · Explain the concepts of future value and present value.
         · Explain why lump sum cash flow is the basis for all other cash flows.

      How and Why the Passage of Time Affects the Value of Money

       The concept of the time value of money (TVM) is predicated on the fact that it is possible to earn interest
       income on cash that you decide to deposit in an investment or interest-bearing account. As times goes by,
       interest is earned on amounts you have invested (present value), which effectively means that time will add
       value (future value) to your savings. The longer the period of time you have your money invested, the more
       interest income will accrue. Also, the higher the rate of interest your account or investment is earning, again,
       the more your money will grow.
       Understanding how to calculate values of money in the present and at different points in the future is a key
       component of understanding the material presented in this chapter--and of making important personal
       financial decisions in your future (see Figure 7.2).

        Figure 7.2 The Time Value of Money It is better to be paid today, or you will lose out on the money you would have earned in
        interest.

      The Lump Sum Payment or Receipt

       The most basic type of financial transaction involves a simple, one-time amount of cash, which can be either a
       receipt (inflow) or a payment (outflow). Such a one-time transaction is typically referred to as a lump sum. A
       lump sum consists of a one-off cash flow that occurs at any single point in time, present or future. Because it is
       always possible to dissect more complex transactions into smaller parts, the lump sum cash flow is the basis
       on which all other types of cash flow are treated. According to the general principle of adding value, every type
       of cash flow stream can be divided into a series of lump sums. For this reason, it is critical to understand the
       math associated with lump sums if you wish to have a greater appreciation, and a complete understanding, of
       more complicated forms of cash flow that may be associated with an investment or a capital purchase by a

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                  7.2 · Time Value of Money (TVM) Basics 193

company.

 7.2 Time Value of Money (TVM) Basics

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Define future value and provide examples.
  · Explain how future dollar amounts are calculated using a single-period scenario.
  · Describe the impact of compounding.

Because we can invest our money in interest-bearing accounts and investments, its value can grow over time
as interest income accrues or returns are realized on our investments. This concept is referred to as future
value (FV). In short, future value refers to how a specific amount of money today can have greater value
tomorrow.

Single-Period Scenario

Let us start with the following example. Your friend is considering putting money in a bank account that will
pay 4% interest per year and is particularly interested in knowing how much money they will have one year
from now if they deposit $1,000 in this account. Your friend understands that you are studying finance and
turns to you for help. By using the TVM principle of future value (FV), you can tell your friend that the answer is
$1,040. The additional $40 that will be in the account after one year will be due to interest earned over that
time. You can calculate this amount relatively easily by taking the original deposit (also referred to as the
principal) of $1,000 and multiplying it by the annual interest rate of 4% for one period (in this case, one year).

By taking the interest earned amount of $40 and adding it to the original principal of $1,000, you will arrive at a
total value of $1,040 in the bank account at the end of the year. So, the $1,040 one year from today is equal to
$1,000 today when working with a 4% earning rate. Therefore, based on the concept of TVM, we can say that
$1,040 represents the future value of $1,000 one year from today and at a 4% rate of interest. We will discuss
interest rates and their importance in TVM decisions in more detail later in this chapter; for now, we can
consider interest rate as a percentage of the principal amount that is earned by the original lender of funds
and/or charged to the borrower of these same funds. Following are a few more examples of the single-period
scenario.

If a person deposits $300 in an account that pays 5% per year, at the end of one year, they will have

If a company has earnings of $2.50 per share and experiences a 10% increase in the following year, the
earnings per share in year two are

If a retail store decides on a 3% price increase for the following year on an item that is currently selling for $50,
the new price in the following year will be

The Impact of Compounding

What would happen if your friend were willing to wait one more year to receive their lump sum payment?
What would the future dollar value in their account be after a two-year period? Returning to our earlier
example, assume that during the second year, your friend leaves the principal ($1,000) and the earned interest
($40) in the account, thereby reinvesting the entire account balance for another year. The quoted interest rate
of 4% reflects the interest the account would earn each year, not over the entire two-year savings period. So,
during the second year of savings, the $1,000 deposit and the $40 interest earned during the first year would
194 7 · Time Value of Money I: Single Payment Value

       both earn 4%:

       The additional $1.60 is interest on the first year's interest and reflects the compounding of interest. Compound
       interest is the term we use to refer to interest income earned in subsequent periods that is based on interest
       income earned in prior periods. To put it simply, compound interest refers to interest that is earned on
       interest. Here, it refers to the $1.60 of interest earned in the second year on the $40.00 of interest earned in
       the first year. Therefore, at the end of two years, the account would have a total value of $1,081.60. This
       consists of the original principal of $1,000 plus the $40.00 interest income earned in year one and the $41.60
       interest income earned in year two.
       The amount of money your friend would have in the account at the end of two years, $1,081.60, is referred to
       as the future value of the original $1,000 amount deposited today in an account that will earn 4% interest every
       year.
       Simple interest applies to year 1 while compound interest or "interest on interest" applies to year 2. This is
       calculated using the following method:

So, the total amount that would be in the account after two years, at 4% annual interest, would be
                                                           .

To determine any future value of money in an interest-bearing account, we multiply the principal amount by 1
plus the interest rate for each year the money remains in the account. From this, we can develop the future
value formula:

In this formula, the number of times we multiply by  depends entirely on the number of years the

money will remain in the bank account, earning interest, before it is withdrawn in a final lump sum distribution

paid out from the account at the end of the chosen savings period. The 1 in the formula represents the

principal amount, or the original $1,000 deposit, which will be included in the final total lump sum payment

when the account is closed and all money is withdrawn at the end of the predetermined savings period.

We can write the above equation in a more condensed mathematical form using time value of money
notation, as follows:

Using these inputs, we have the following formula:
With this equation, we can calculate the value of the savings account after any number of years. For example,
suppose we are considering 3, 10, and 50 years from the original deposit date at the annual 4% interest rate:

How can this savings account have grown to be so large after 50 years? This question is answered by the
impact of compounding interest. Every year, the interest earned in previous years will also earn interest along

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                  7.2 · Time Value of Money (TVM) Basics 195

with the initial deposit. This will have the effect of accelerating the growth of the total dollar value of the
account.

This is the important effect of the compounding of interest: money grows in larger and larger increments the
longer you leave it in an interest-bearing account. In effect, the compounding of interest over time accelerates
the growth of money.

In order to determine the FV of any amount of money, it will always be necessary to know the following pieces
of information: (1) the principal, initial deposit, or present value (PV); (2) the rate of interest, usually
expressed on an annual basis as r; and (3) the number of time periods that the money will remain in the
account (n). The interest rate is often referred to as the growth rate, or the annual percentage increase on
savings or on an investment. When the rate is raised to the power of the number of periods, the formula

            will yield a number that is commonly referred to as the future value interest factor (FVIF). As a result
of this process, as n (time, or the number of periods) increases, the future value interest factor will increase.
Also, as r (interest rate) increases, the FVIF will increases. For these reasons, the future value calculation is
directly determined by both the interest rate being used and the total amount of time--specifically, the
number of periods--being considered.

 THINK IT THROUGH

 Calculating Future Values

  Here's another example of calculating future values in multiple-period scenarios.

  On a recent drive, you spotted your dream home, which is currently listed at $400,000. Unfortunately, you
  are not in a position to buy it right away and will have to wait at least another six years before you can
  afford it. If house values are appreciating at an annual rate of inflation of 4%, how much will a similar house
  cost after six years?

  Solution:

  In this case, PV is the current cost of the house, or $400,000; n is six years; r is the average annual inflation
  rate, or 4%; and we have to solve for FV.

Therefore, under these circumstances, the house will cost $506,127.60 after six years.

How Time Impacts Compounding

We have just seen that time will lead to the growth of our money. As long as the prevailing growth or interest
rate of any account we have our money in is positive, the passage of time will have the effect of growing the
value of our money. The longer the period of time, the greater the growth and the larger the future value of
the money will be. This can be reinforced very clearly with the following example.

Melvin is saving money in an account at a local bank that earns 5% per year. He begins with a deposit in his

account of $100 and decides to save his money for exactly one year. He will not be making any further deposits

into the account during the year. Melvin will earn         or $5, in interest income. Adding this to the

original deposit balance of $100 will give him a total of  or $105, in the account at the end of one

year.

Melvin likes this idea and believes he may be able to keep his money in the account for a longer period of time.
How much money will he have in his account, without any further deposits, at the end of years two, three, four,
and five?
196 7 · Time Value of Money I: Single Payment Value

       Using the future value formula, the calculation is as follows:

       How the Interest Rate Impacts Compounding
       Melvin likes the idea of earning more money over time, but he also believes that what he would earn in
       interest may not be enough for some of the things he plans to buy in the future. His friend suggests finding an
       account or some form of investment with a greater interest rate than the 5% he can get at his local bank.
       Melvin thinks he can leave his money in an account or investment for a total of five years. He found
       investments that will provide annual returns of 6%, 7%, 10%, and 12%. Using the
       formula, we can complete the following calculations for him:

       Again, Melvin likes this information, and he states that he will try to find the highest interest rate available. This
       makes sense, but it's important to remember that investments are usually not guaranteed to earn you specific
       interest rates, or rates of return. Most investments, other than Treasury investments such as Treasury bonds,
       carry some form of financial risk, either small or large, and the greater the rate of return, the more likely it is
       that the risk associated with the investment will also be greater. This risk does not have any effect on the
       future calculations we have just completed, but it an important factor to bear in mind and consider well before
       moving ahead and putting your money in any investment or financial instrument.

      7.3 Methods for Solving Time Value of Money Problems

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Explain how future dollar amounts are calculated.
         · Explain how present dollar amounts are calculated.
         · Describe how discount rates are calculated.
         · Describe how growth rates are calculated.
         · Illustrate how periods of time for specified growth are calculated.
         · Use a financial calculator and Excel to solve TVM problems.

       We can determine future value by using any of four methods: (1) mathematical equations, (2) calculators with
       financial functions, (3) spreadsheets, and (4) FVIF tables. With the advent and wide acceptance and use of
       financial calculators and spreadsheet software, FVIF (and other such time value of money tables and factors)
       have become obsolete, and we will not discuss them in this text. Nevertheless, they are often still published in
       other finance textbooks and are also available on the internet to use if you so choose.

      Using Timelines to Organize TVM Information

       A useful tool for conceptualizing present value and future value problems is a timeline. A timeline is a visual,

        Access for free at openstax.org
                       7.3 · Methods for Solving Time Value of Money Problems 197

linear representation of periods and cash flows over a set amount of time. Each timeline shows today at the
left and a desired ending, or future point (maturity date), at the right.

Now, let us take an example of a future value problem that has a time frame of five years. Before we begin to
solve for any answers, it would be a good approach to lay out a timeline like that shown in Table 7.1:

           Year 0   12345
           (Today)

                                                            Table 7.1

The timeline provides a visual reference for us and puts the problem into perspective.
Now, let's say that we are interested in knowing what today's balance of $100 in our saving account, earning
5% annually, will be worth at the end of each of the next five years. Using the future value formula

that we covered earlier, we would arrive at the following values: $105 at the end of year one, $110.25 at the
end of year two, $115.76 at the end of year three, $121.55 at the end of year four, and $127.63 at the end of
year five.

With the numerical information, the timeline (at a 5% interest or growth rate) would look like Table 7.2:

Year 0     1        2  3  4  5

$100.00 $105.00 $110.25 $115.76 $121.55 $127.63

Table 7.2

Using timelines to lay out TVM problems becomes more and more valuable as problems become more
complex. You should get into the habit of using a timeline to set up these problems prior to using the
equation, a calculator, or a spreadsheet to help minimize input errors. Now we will move on to the different
methods available that will help you solve specific TVM problems. These are the financial calculator and the
Excel spreadsheet.

Using a Financial Calculator to Solve TVM Problems

An extremely popular method of solving TVM problems is through the use of a financial calculator. Financial
calculators such as the Texas Instruments BAII PlusTM Professional (https://openstax.org/r/baii-plus-
professional) will typically have five keys that represent the critical variables used in most common TVM
problems: N, I/Y, PV, FV, and PMT. These represent the following:

These are the only keys on a financial calculator that are necessary to solve TVM problems involving a single
payment or lump sum.

Example 1: Future Value of a Single Payment or Lump Sum

Let's start with a simple example that will provide you with most of the skills needed to perform TVM functions
involving a single lump sum payment with a financial calculator.
198 7 · Time Value of Money I: Single Payment Value

Suppose that you have $1,000 and that you deposit this in a savings account earning 3% annually for a period
of four years. You will naturally be interested in knowing how much money you will have in your account at the
end of this four-year time period (assuming you make no other deposits and withdraw no cash).

To answer this question, you will need to work with factors of $1,000, the present value (PV); four periods or
years, represented by N; and the 3% interest rate, or I/Y. Make sure that the calculator register information is
cleared, or you may end up with numbers from previous uses that will interfere with the solution. The register-
clearing process will depend on what type of calculator you are using, but for the TI BA II PlusTM Professional
calculator, clearing can be accomplished by pressing the keys 2ND and FV [CLR TVM].

Once you have cleared any old data, you can enter the values in the appropriate key areas: 4 for N, 3 for I/Y,
and 1000 for PV. Now you have entered enough information to calculate the future value. Continue by
pressing the CPT (compute) key, followed by the FV key. The answer you end up with should be displayed as
1,125.51 (see Table 7.3).

Step  Description                                        Enter       Display

1 Clear calculator register                          CE/C                     0.00

2 Enter present value (as a negative integer) 1000 +|- PV PV = -1,000.00

3 Enter interest rate                                3 I/Y      I/Y =         3.00

4 Enter time periods                                 4N         N =           4.00

5 Indicate no payments or deposits                   0 PMT      PMT =         0.00

6 Compute future value                               CPT FV     FV = 1,125.51

Table 7.3 Calculator Steps for Finding the Future Value of a Single Payment or Lump Sum1

Important Notes for Using a Calculator and the Cash Flow Sign Convention

Please note that the PV was entered as negative $1,000 (or -$1000). This is because most financial calculators
(and spreadsheets) follow something called the cash flow sign convention, which is a way for calculators and
spreadsheets to keep the relative direction of the cash flow straight. Positive numbers are used to represent
cash inflows, and negative numbers should always be used for cash outflows.

In this example, the $1,000 is an investment that requires a cash outflow. For this reason, -1000 is entered as
the present value, as you will be essentially handing this $1,000 to a bank or to someone else to initiate the
transaction. Conversely, the future value represents a cash inflow in four years' time. This is why the calculator
generates a positive 1,125.51 as the end result of this calculation.

Had you entered the present value of $1,000 as a positive number, there would have been no real concern, but
the ending future value answer would have been returned expressed as a negative number. This would be
correct had you borrowed $1,000 today (cash inflow) and agreed to repay $1,125.51 (cash outflow) four years
from now. Also, it is important that you do not change the sign of any input value by using the - (minus) key).
For example, on the TI BA II PlusTM Professional, you must use the +|- key instead of the minus key. If you
enter 1000 and then hit the +|- key, you will get a negative 1,000 amount showing in the calculator display.

An important feature of most financial calculators is that it is possible to change any of the variables in a
problem without needing to reenter all of the other data. For example, suppose that we wanted to find out the
future value in our bank account if we left the money from our previous example invested for 20 years instead

1 The specific financial calculator in these examples is the Texas Instruments BA II PlusTM Professional model, but you can use other
financial calculators for these types of calculations.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                               7.3 · Methods for Solving Time Value of Money Problems 199

of 4. Before clearing any of the data, simply enter 20 for N and then press the CPT key and then the FV key.
After this is done, all other inputs will remain the same, and you will arrive at an answer of $1,806.11.

THINK IT THROUGH

How to Determine Future Value When Other Variables Are Known

Here's an example of using a financial calculator to solve a common time value of money problem. You
have $2,000 invested in a money market account that is expected to earn 4% annually. What will be the total
value in the account after five years?

Solution:

Follow the recommended financial calculator steps in Table 7.4.

           Step   Description                                           Enter         Display

           1 Clear calculator register                              CE/C                0.00

           2 Enter present value (as a negative integer) 2000 +|- PV PV = -2,000.00

           3 Enter interest rate                                    4 I/Y        I/Y =  4.00

           4 Enter time periods                                     5N           N =    5.00

           5 Indicate no payments or deposits                       0 PMT        PMT =  0.00

           6 Compute future value                                   CPT FV       FV = 2,433.31

           Table 7.4 Calculator Steps for Determining Future Value

The result of this future value calculation of the invested money is $2,433.31.

Example 2: Present Value of Lump Sums

Solving for the present value (discounted value) of a lump sum is the exact opposite of solving for a future
value. Once again, if we enter a negative value for the FV, then the calculated PV will be a positive amount.
Taking the reverse of what we did in our example of future value above, we can enter -1,125.51 for FV, 3 for
I/Y, and 4 for N. Hit the CPT and PV keys in succession, and you should arrive at a displayed answer of 1,000.

An important constant within the time value of money framework is that the present value will always be less
than the future value unless the interest rate is negative. It is important to keep this in mind because it can
help you spot incorrect answers that may arise from errors with your input.

 THINK IT THROUGH

 How to Determine Present Value When Other Variables Are Known

  Here is another example of using a financial calculator to solve a common time value of money problem.
  You have just won a second-prize lottery jackpot that will pay a single total lump sum of $50,000 five years
  from now. How much value would this have in today's dollars, assuming a 5% interest rate?

  Solution:

  Follow the recommended financial calculator steps in Table 7.5.
200 7 · Time Value of Money I: Single Payment Value

Step                             Description                 Enter         Display

1 Clear calculator register                              CE/C                       0.00

2 Enter future value (as a negative integer) 50000 +|- FV FV = -50,000.00

3 Enter interest rate                                    5 I/Y      I/Y =           5.00

4 Enter time periods                                     5N         N =             5.00

5 Indicate no payments or deposits                       0 PMT      PMT =           0.00

6 Compute present value                                  CPT PV     PV = 39,176.31

Table 7.5 Calculator Steps for Determining Present Value

The present value of the lottery jackpot is $39,176.31.

Example 3: Calculating the Number of Periods

There will be times when you will know both the value of the money you have now and how much money you
will need to have at some unknown point in the future. If you also know the interest rate your money will be
earning for the foreseeable future, then you can solve for N, or the exact amount of time periods that it will
take for the present value of your money to grow into the future value that you will require for your eventual
use.

Now, suppose that you have $100 today and you would like to know how long it will take for you to be able to
purchase a product that costs $133.82.

After making sure your calculator is clear, you will enter 5 for I/Y, -100 for PV, and 133.82 for FV. Now press
CPT N, and you will see that it will take 5.97 years for your money to grow to the desired amount of $133.82.

Again, an important thing to note when using a financial calculator to solve TVM problems is that you must
enter your numbers according to the cash flow sign convention discussed above. If you do not make either the
PV or the FV a negative number (with the other being a positive number), then you will end up getting an error
message on the screen instead of the answer to the problem. The reason for this is that if both numbers you
enter for the PV and FV are positive, the calculator will operate under the assumption that you are receiving a
financial benefit without making any cash outlay as an initial investment. If you get such an error message in
your calculations, you can simply press the CE/C key. This will clear the error, and you can reenter your data
correctly by changing the sign of either PV or FV (but not both of these, of course).

 THINK IT THROUGH

 Determining Periods of Time

  Here is an additional example of using a financial calculator to solve a common time value of money
  problem. You want to be able to contribute $25,000 to your child's first year of college tuition and related
  expenses. You currently have $15,000 in a tuition savings account that is earning 6% interest every year.
  How long will it take for this account grow into the targeted amount of $25,000, assuming no additional
  deposits or withdrawals will be made?

  Solution:

  Table 7.6 shows the steps you will take.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                    7.3 · Methods for Solving Time Value of Money Problems 201

Step  Description                                          Enter         Display

1 Clear calculator register         CE/C                                 0.0000

2 Enter present value (as a negative integer) 15000 +|- PV PV = -15,000.0000

3 Enter interest rate               6 I/Y                         I/Y =  6.0000

4 Enter future value                25000 FV FV = 25,000.0000

5 Indicate no payments or deposits  0 PMT                         PMT =  0.0000

6 Compute time periods              CPT N                         N =    8.7667

Table 7.6 Calculator Steps for Determining Period of Time

The result of this calculation is a time period of 8.7667 years for the account to reach the targeted amount.

Example 4: Solving for the Interest Rate

Solving for an interest rate is a common TVM problem that can be easily addressed with a financial calculator.
Let's return to our earlier example, but in this case, we know that we have $1,000 at the present time and that
we will need to have a total of $1,125.51 four years from now. Let's also say that the only way we can add to
the current value of our savings is through interest income. We will not be able to make any further deposits in
addition to our initial $1,000 account balance.

What interest rate should we be sure to get on our savings account in order to have a total savings account
value of $1,125.51 four years from now?

Once again, clear the calculator, and then enter 4 for N, -1,000 for PV, and 1,125.51 for FV. Then, press the CPT
and I/Y keys and you will find that you need to earn an average 3% interest per year in order to grow your
savings balance to the desired amount of $1,125.51. Again, if you end up with an error message, you probably
failed to follow the sign convention relating to cash inflow and outflow that we discussed earlier. To correct
this, you will need to clear the calculator and reenter the information correctly.

After you believe you are done and have arrived at a final answer, always make sure you give it a quick review.
You can ask yourself questions such as "Does this make any sense?" "How does this compare to other
answers I have arrived at?" or "Is this logical based on everything I know about the scenario?" Knowing how
to go about such a review will require you to understand the concepts you are attempting to apply and what
you are trying to make the calculator do. Further, it is critical to understand the relationships among the
different inputs and variables of the problem. If you do not fully understand these relationships, you may end
up with an incorrect answer. In the end, it is important to realize that any calculator is simply a tool. It will only
do what you direct it to do and has no idea what your objective is or what it is that you really wish to
accomplish.

 THINK IT THROUGH

 Determining Interest or Growth Rate

  Here is another example of using a financial calculator to solve a common time value of money problem.
  Let's use a similar example to the one we used when calculating periods of time to determine an interest or
  growth rate. You still want to help your child with their first year of college tuition and related expenses.
  You also still have a starting amount of $15,000, but you have not yet decided on a savings plan to use.
202 7 · Time Value of Money I: Single Payment Value

Instead, the information you now have is that your child is just under 10 years old and will begin college at
age 18. For simplicity's sake, let's say that you have eight and a half years before you will need to meet your
total savings target of $25,000. What rate of interest will you need to grow your saved money from $15,000
to $25,000 in this time period, again with no other deposits or withdrawals?

Solution:

Follow the steps shown in Table 7.7.

           Step                  Description                         Enter         Display

           1 Clear calculator register               CE/C                          0.0000

           2 Enter present value (as a negative integer) 15000 +|- PV PV = -15,000.0000

           3 Enter time periods                      8.5 N                  N =    8.5000

           4 Enter future value                      25000 FV FV = 25,000.0000

           5 Indicate no payments or deposits        0 PMT                  PMT =  0.0000

           6 Compute interest rate                   CPT I/Y                I/Y =  6.1940

           Table 7.7 Calculator Steps for Determining Interest Rate

The result of this calculation is a necessary interest rate of 6.194%.

Using Excel to Solve TVM Problems

Excel spreadsheets can be excellent tools to use when solving time value of money problems. There are
dozens of financial functions available in Excel, but a student who can use a few of these functions can solve
almost any TVM problem. Special functions that relate to TVM calculations are as follows:

                                                                  Future Value (FV)
                                                                 Present Value (PV)
                                                           Number of Periods (NPER)
                                                                Interest Rate (RATE)
Excel also includes a function called Payment (PMT) that is used in calculations involving multiple payments or
deposits (annuities). These will be covered in Time Value of Money II: Equal Multiple Payments.
Future Value (FV)
The Future Value function in Excel is also referred to as FV and can be used to calculate the value of a single
lump sum amount carried to any point in the future. The FV function syntax is similar to that of the other four
basic time-value functions and has the following inputs (referred to as arguments), similar to the functions
listed above:
                                                                 Rate: Interest Rate
                                                            Nper: Number of Periods

                                                                    Pmt: Payment
                                                                  PV: Present Value
Lump sum problems do not involve payments, so the value of Pmt in such calculations is 0. Another argument,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        7.3 · Methods for Solving Time Value of Money Problems 203

Type, refers to the timing of a payment and carries a default value of the end of the period, which is the most
common timing (as opposed to the beginning of a period). This may be ignored in our current example, which
means the default value of the end of the period will be used.
The spreadsheet in Figure 7.3 shows two examples of using the FV function in Excel to calculate the future
value of $100 in five years at 5% interest.
In cell E1, the FV function references the values in cells B1 through B4 for each of the arguments. When a user
begins to type a function into a spreadsheet, Excel provides helpful information in the form of on-screen tips
showing the argument inputs that are required to complete the function. In our spreadsheet example, as the
FV formula is being typed into cell E2, a banner showing the arguments necessary to complete the function
appears directly below, hovering over cell E3.

                                                               Figure 7.3 Using the FV Function in Excel

Cells E1 and E2 show how the FV function appears in the spreadsheet as it is typed in with the required
arguments. Cell E4 shows the calculated answer for cell E1 after hitting the enter key. Once the enter key is
pressed, the hint banner hovering over cell E3 will disappear. The second example of the FV function in our
example spreadsheet is in cell E6. Here, the actual numerical values are used in the FV function equation
rather than cell references. The method in cell E8 is referred to as hard coding. In general, it is preferable to
use the cell reference method, as this allows for copying formulas and provides the user with increased
flexibility in accounting for changes to input data. This ability to accept cell references in formulas is one of the
greatest strengths of Excel as a spreadsheet tool.

        Download the spreadsheet file (https://openstax.org/r/docs.google_uc_export) containing key Chapter
        7 Excel exhibits.

Determining Future Value When Other Variables Are Known. You have $2,000 invested in a money market
account that is expected to earn 4% annually. What will be the total value in the account in five years?

Note: Be sure to follow the sign conventions. In this case, the PV should be entered as a negative value.

Note: In Excel, interest and growth rates must be entered as percentages, not as whole integers. So, 4 percent
must be entered as 4% or 0.04--not 4, as you would enter in a financial calculator.

Note: It is always assumed that if not specifically stated, the compounding period of any given interest rate is
annual, or based on years.

Note: The Excel command used to calculate future value is as follows:
204 7 · Time Value of Money I: Single Payment Value

                                                       =FV(rate, nper, pmt, [pv], [type])
       You may simply type the values for the arguments in the above formula. Another option is to use the Excel
       insert function option. If you decide on this second method, below are several screenshots of dialog boxes you
       will encounter and will be required to complete.
        1. First, go to Formulas in the upper menu bar, and select the Insert Function option. When you do so, a

             dialog box will appear that looks like what you see in Figure 7.4.

                                                                          Figure 7.4 Dialog Box to Insert FV Function

             This dialog box allows you to either search for a function or select a function that has been used recently.
             In this example, you can search for FV by typing this in the search box and selecting Go, or you can simply
             choose FV from the list of most recently used functions (as shown here with the highlighted FV option).
        2. Once you select FV and click the OK button, a new dialog box will appear for you to enter the necessary
             details. See Figure 7.5.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        7.3 · Methods for Solving Time Value of Money Problems 205

                                                         Figure 7.5 New Dialog Box for FV Function Arguments

      Figure 7.6 shows the completed data input for the variables, referred to here as "function arguments."
      Note that cell addresses are used in this example. This allows the spreadsheet to still be useful if you
      decide to change any of the variables. You may also type values directly into the Function Arguments
      dialog box, but if you do this and you have to change any of your inputs later, you will have to reenter the
      new information. Using cell addresses is always a preferable method of entering the function argument
      data.

                                               Figure 7.6 Completed Data Entry Menu for FV Function Arguments

Additional notes:
1. The Pmt argument or variable can be ignored in this instance, or you can enter a placeholder value of
206 7 · Time Value of Money I: Single Payment Value

             zero. This example shows a blank or ignored entry, but either option may be used in problems such as this
             where the information is not relevant.
        2. The Type argument does not apply to this problem. Type refers to the timing of cash flows and is usually
             used in multiple payment or annuity problems to indicate whether payments or deposits are made at the
             beginning of periods or at the end. In single lump sum problems, this is not relevant information, and the
             Type argument box is left empty.
        3. When you use cell addresses as function argument inputs, the numerical values within the cells are
             displayed off to the right. This helps you ensure that you are identifying the correct cells in your function.
             The final answer generated by the function is also displayed for your preliminary review.
       Once you are satisfied with the result, hit the OK button, and the dialog box will disappear, with only the final
       numerical result appearing in the cell where you have set up the function.
       The FV of this present value has been calculated as approximately $2,433.31.
       Present Value (PV)
       We have covered the idea that present value is the opposite of future value. As an example, in the spreadsheet
       shown in Figure 7.3, we calculated that the future value of $100 five years from now at a 5% interest rate would
       be $127.63. By reversing this process, we can safely state that $127.63 received five years from now with a 5%
       interest (or discount) rate would have a value of just $100 today. Thus, $100 is its present value. In Excel, the
       PV function is used to determine present value (see Figure 7.7).

                                                                        Figure 7.7 Using the PV Function in Excel

       The formula in cell E1 uses cell references in a similar fashion to our FV example spreadsheet above. Also
       similar to our earlier example is the hard-coded formula for this calculation, which is shown in cell E6. In both
       cases, the answers we arrive at using the PV function are identical, but once again, using cell references is
       preferred over hard coding if possible.

       THINK IT THROUGH
       Determining Present Value When Other Variables Are Known

         You have just won a second-prize lottery jackpot that will pay a single total lump sum of $50,000 five years
         from now. You are interested in knowing how much value this would have in today's dollars, assuming a 5%
         interest rate.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     7.3 · Methods for Solving Time Value of Money Problems 207

Notes:
1. If you wish for the present value amount to be positive, the future value you enter here should be a

      negative value.
2. In Excel, interest and growth rates must be entered as percentages, not as whole integers. So, 5

      percent must be entered as 5% or 0.05--not 5, as you would enter in a financial calculator.
3. It is always assumed that if not specifically stated, the compounding period of any given interest rate is

      annual, or based on years.
4. The Excel command used to calculate present value is as shown here:

                                             =PV(rate, nper, pmt, [fv], [type])
Solution:
As with the FV formula covered in the first tab of this workbook, you may simply type the values for the
arguments in the above formula. Another option is to again use the Insert Function option in Excel. Figure
7.8, Figure 7.9, and Figure 7.10 provide several screenshots that demonstrate the steps you'll need to follow
if you decide to enter the PV function from the Insert Function menu.
1. First, go to Formulas in the upper menu bar, and select Insert Function. When you do so, the Insert

      Function dialog box will appear (see Figure 7.8).

                                                              Figure 7.8 Dialog Box to Insert PV Function

      As discussed in the FV function example above, this dialog box allows you to either search for a
      function or select a function that has been used recently. In this example, you can search for PV by
      typing this into the search box and selecting Go, or you can simply choose PV from the list of the most
      recently used functions.
2. Once you have highlighted PV, click the OK button, and a new dialog box will appear for you to enter
      the necessary details. Similar to our FV function example, it will look like Figure 7.9.
208 7 · Time Value of Money I: Single Payment Value

                                                                  Figure 7.9 New Dialog Box for PV Function Arguments

               Figure 7.10 shows the completed data input for the function arguments. Note that once again, cell
               addresses are used in this example. This allows the spreadsheet to still be useful if you decide to
               change any of the variables. As in the FV function example, you may also type values directly in the
               Function Arguments dialog box, but if you do this and you have to change any of your input later, you
               will have to reenter the new information. Remember that using cell addresses is always a preferable
               method of entering the function argument data.

                                                            Figure 7.10 Completed Dialog Box for PV Function Arguments

               Again, similar to our FV function example, the Function Arguments dialog box shows values off to the

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        7.3 · Methods for Solving Time Value of Money Problems 209

        right of the data entry area, including our final answer. The Pmt and Type boxes are again not relevant
        to this single lump sum example, for reasons we covered in the FV example.
        Review your answer. Once you are satisfied with the result, click the OK button, and the dialog box will
        disappear, with only the final numerical result appearing in the cell where you have set up the function.
        The PV of this future value has been calculated as approximately $39,176.31.

Periods of Time
The following discussion will show you how to use Excel to determine the amount of time a given present
value will need to grow into a specified future value when the interest or growth rate is known.
You want to be able to contribute $25,000 to your child's first year of college tuition and related expenses. You
currently have $15,000 in a tuition savings account that is earning 6% interest every year. How long will it take
for this account grow into the targeted amount of $25,000, assuming no additional deposits or withdrawals are
made?

Notes:
1. As with our other examples, interest and growth rates must be entered as percentages, not as whole

      integers. So, 6 percent must be entered as 6% or 0.06--not 6, as you would enter in a financial calculator.
2. The present value needs to be entered as a negative value in accordance with the sign convention covered

      earlier.
3. The Excel command used to calculate the amount of time, or number of periods, is this:

                                              =NPER (rate, pmt, pv, [fv], [type])

As with our FV and PV examples, you may simply type the values of the arguments in the above formula, or we
can again use the Insert Function option in Excel. If you do so, you will need to work with the various dialog
boxes after you select Insert Function.
1. First, go to Formulas in the upper menu bar, and select the Insert Function option. When you do so, the

      Insert Function dialog box will appear (see Figure 7.11).
210 7 · Time Value of Money I: Single Payment Value

                                                                       Figure 7.11 Dialog Box to Insert NPER Function

             As discussed in our previous examples on FV and PV, this menu allows you to either search for a function
             or select a function that has been used recently. In this example, you can search for NPER by typing this
             into the search box and selecting Go, or you can simply choose NPER from the list of most recently used
             functions.
        2. Once you have highlighted NPER, click the OK button, and a new dialog box will appear for you to enter
             the necessary details. As in our previous examples, it will look like Figure 7.12.

                                                           Figure 7.12 New Dialog Box for NPER Function Arguments
        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        7.3 · Methods for Solving Time Value of Money Problems 211

Figure 7.13 shows the completed Function Arguments dialog box. Note that once again, we are using cell
addresses in this example.

                                             Figure 7.13 Completed Dialog Box for NPER Function Arguments

As in the previous function examples, values are shown off to the right of the data input area, and our final
answer of approximately 8.77 is displayed at the bottom. Also, once again, the Pmt and Type boxes are not
relevant to this single lump sum example.
Review your answer, and once you are satisfied with the result, click the OK button. The dialog box will
disappear, with only the final numerical result appearing in the cell where you have set up the function.
The amount of time required for the desired growth to occur is calculated as approximately 8.77 years.
Interest or Growth Rate
You can also use Excel to determine the required growth rate when the present value, future value, and total
number of required periods are known.
Let's discuss a similar example to the one we used to calculate periods of time. You still want to help your child
with their first year of college tuition and related expenses, and you still have a starting amount of $15,000, but
you have not yet decided which savings plan to use.
Instead, the information you now have is that your child is just under 10 years old and will begin college at age
18. For simplicity's sake, let's say that you have eight and a half years until you will need to meet your total
savings target of $25,000. What rate of interest will you need to grow your saved money from $15,000 to
$25,000 in this time, again with no other deposits or withdrawals?

Note: The present value needs to be entered as a negative value.
                                                            Interest Rate (RATE)
212 7 · Time Value of Money I: Single Payment Value

       Note: The Excel command used to calculate interest or growth rate is as follows:
                                               =RATE(nper, pmt, pv, [fv], [type], [guess])

       As with our other TVM function examples, you may simply type the values for the arguments into the above
       formula. We also again have the same alternative to use the Insert Function option in Excel. If you choose this
       option, you will again see the Insert Function dialog box after you click the Insert Function button.
        1. First, go to Formulas in the upper menu bar, and select the Insert Function option. When you do so, the

             Insert Function dialog box will appear (see Figure 7.14).

                                                                       Figure 7.14 Dialog Box to Insert RATE Function

        2. This time, find and highlight RATE, and click the OK button once you have done so. The Function
             Arguments dialog box will look like Figure 7.15.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 7.3 · Methods for Solving Time Value of Money Problems 213

                                               Figure 7.15 New Dialog Box for RATE Function Arguments

Once we complete the input, again using cell addresses for the required argument values, we will see
what is shown in Figure 7.16.

                                          Figure 7.16 Completed Dialog Box for RATE Function Arguments

As in our other examples, cell values are shown as numerical values off to the right, and our answer of
approximately 0.0619, or 6.19%, is shown at the bottom of the dialog box.
This answer also can be checked from a logic point of view because of the similar example we worked
through when calculating periods of time. Our present value and future value are the same as in that
example, and our time period is now 8.5 years, which is just under the result we arrived at (8.77 years) in
214 7 · Time Value of Money I: Single Payment Value

             the periods example.
             So, if we are now working with a slightly shorter time frame for the savings to grow from $15,000 into
             $25,000, then we would expect to have a slightly greater growth rate. That is exactly how the answer turns
             out, as the calculated required interest rate of approximately 6.19% is just slightly greater than the growth
             rate of 6% used in the previous example. So, based on this, it looks like our answer here passes a simple
             "sanity check" review.

      7.4 Applications of TVM in Finance

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Explain how the time value of money can impact your personal financial goals.
         · Explain how the time value of money is related to inflation.
         · Explain how the time value of money is related to financial risk.
         · Explain how compounding period frequency affects the time value of money.

      Single-Period Scenario

       Let's say you want to buy a new car next year, and the one you have your eye on should be selling for $20,000
       a year from now. How much will you need to put away today at 5% interest to have $20,000 a year from now?
       Essentially, you are trying to determine how much $20,000 one year from now is worth today at 5% interest
       over the year. To find a present value, we reverse the growth concept and lower or discount the future value
       back to the current period.
       The interest rate that we use to determine the present value of a future cash flow is referred to as the
       discount rate because it is bringing the money back in time in terms of its value. The discount rate refers to
       the annual rate of reduction on a future value and is the inverse of the growth rate. Once we know this
       discount rate, we can solve for the present value (PV), the value today of tomorrow's cash flow. By changing
       the FV equation, we can turn

       into

       which is the present value equation. The fraction shown above is referred to as the present value interest
       factor (PVIF). The PVIF is simply the reciprocal of the FVIF, which makes sense because these factors are doing
       exactly opposite things. Therefore, the amount you need to deposit today to earn $20,000 in one year
       at 5% interest is

      The Multiple-Period Scenario

       There will often be situations when you need to determine the present value of a cash flow that is scheduled to
       occur several years in the future (see Figure 7.17). We can again use the formula for present value to calculate
       a value today of future cash flows over multiple time periods.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                       7.4 · Applications of TVM in Finance 215

                                                              Figure 7.17 Determining Future Cash Flow

An example of this would be if you wanted to buy a savings bond for Charlotte, the daughter of a close friend.
The face value of the savings bond you have in mind is $1,000, which is the amount Charlotte would receive in
30 years (the future value). If the government is currently paying 5% per year on savings bonds, how much will
it cost you today to buy this savings bond?
The $1,000 face value of the bond is the future value, and the number of years n that Charlotte must wait to
get this face value is 30 years. The interest rate r is 5.0% and is the discount rate for the savings bond. Applying
the present value equation, we calculate the current price of this savings bond as follows:

So, it would cost you $231.38 to purchase this 30-year, 5%, $1,000 face-valued bond.
What we have done in the above example is reduce, or discount, the future value of the bond to arrive at a
value expressed in today's dollars. Effectively, this discounting process is the exact opposite of compounding
interest that we covered earlier in our discussion of future value.
An important concept to remember is that compounding is the process that takes a present valuation of
money to some point in the future, while discounting takes a future value of money and equates it to present
dollar value terms.
Common applications in which you might use the present value formula include determining how much
money you would need to invest in an interest-bearing account today in order to finance a college education
for your oldest child and how much you would need to invest today to meet your retirement plans 30 years
from now.

TVM, Inflation, Compounding Interest, Investing, Opportunity Costs, and Risk

The time value of money (TVM) is a critical concept in understanding the value of money relative to the
amount of time it is held, saved, or invested. The TVM concept and its specific applications are frequently used
by individuals and organizations that might wish to better understand the values of financial assets and to
improve investing and saving strategies, whether these are personal or within business environments.
As we have discussed, the key element behind the concept of TVM is that a given amount of money is worth
more today than that same amount of money will be at any point in the future. Again, this is because money
can be saved or invested in interest-bearing accounts or investments that will generate interest income over
time, thus resulting in increased savings and dollar values as time passes.
Inflation
The entire concept of TVM exists largely due to the presence of inflation. Inflation is defined as a general
increase in the prices of goods and services and/or a drop in the value of money and its purchasing power.
The purchasing power of the consumer dollar is a statistic tracked by the part of the US Bureau of Labor
216 7 · Time Value of Money I: Single Payment Value

       Statistics and is part of the consumer price index (CPI) data that is periodically published by that government
       agency. In a way, purchasing power can be viewed as a mirror image or exact opposite of inflation or increases
       in consumer prices, as measured by the CPI. Figure 7.18 demonstrates the decline in the purchasing power of
       the consumer dollar over the 13-year period from 2007 to 2020.
       With this in mind, we can work with the TVM formula and use it to help determine the present value of money
       you have in hand today, as well as how this same amount of money may be valued at any specific point in the
       future and at any specific rate of interest.

            Figure 7.18 Historical Purchasing Power Decline as a Result of Inflation, 2007-2020 (data source: Bureau of Labor Statistics)

       The Relationship between TVM and Inflation
       As we have seen, the future value formula can be very helpful in calculating the value of a sum of cash (or any
       liquid asset) at some future point in time. One of the important ideas relating to the concept of TVM is that it
       is preferable to spend money today instead of at some point in the future (all other things being equal) when
       inflation is positive. However, in very rare instances in our economy when inflation is negative, spending
       money later is preferable to spending it now. This is because in cases of negative inflation, the purchasing
       power of a dollar is actually greater in the future, as the costs of goods and services are declining as we move
       into the future.
       Most investors would be inclined to take a payment of money today rather than wait five years to receive a
       payment in the same amount. This is because inflation is almost always positive, which means that general
       prices of goods and services tend to increase over the passage of time. This is a direct function and result of
       normal economic growth. The crux of the concept of TVM is directly related to maintaining the present value
       of financial assets or increasing the value of these financial assets at different points in the future when they
       may be needed to obtain goods and services. If a consumer's monetary assets grow at a greater rate than
       inflation over any period of time, then the consumer will realize an increase in their overall purchasing power.
       Conversely, if inflation exceeds savings or investment growth, then the consumer will lose purchasing power
       as time goes by under such conditions.
       The Impact of Inflation on TVM
       The difference between present and future values of money can be easily seen when considered under the
       effects of inflation. As we discussed above, inflation is defined as a state of continuously rising prices for goods
       and services within an economy. In the study of economics, the laws of supply and demand state that
       increasing the amount of money within an economy without increasing the amount of goods and services
       available will give consumers and businesses more money to spend on those goods and services. When more
       money is created and made available to the consuming public, the value of each unit of currency will diminish.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                       7.4 · Applications of TVM in Finance 217

This will then have the effect of incentivizing consumers to spend their money now, or in the very near future,
instead of saving cash for later use. Another concept in economics states that this relationship between
money supply and monetary value is one of the primary reasons why the Federal Reserve might at times
take steps to inject money into a stagnant, lethargic economy. Increasing the money supply will lead to
increased economic activity and consumer spending, but it can also have the negative effect of increasing the
costs of goods and services, furthering an increase in the rate of inflation.

Consumers who decide to save their money now and for the foreseeable future, as opposed to spending it
now, are simply making the economic choice to have their cash on hand and available. So, this ends up being a
decision that is made despite the risk of potential inflation and perhaps losing purchasing power. When
inflationary risk is low, most people will save their money to have it available to spend later. Conversely, in
times when inflationary risk is high, people are more likely to spend their money now, before its purchasing
power erodes. This idea of inflationary risk is the primary reason why savers and investors who decide to save
now in order to have their money available at some point in the future will insist they are paid, through
interest or return on investment, for the future value of any savings or financial instrument.

Lower interest rates will usually lead to higher inflation. This is because, in a way, interest rates can be viewed
as the cost of money. This allows for the idea that interest rates can be further viewed as a tax on holding on
to sums of money instead of using it. If an economy is experiencing lower interest rates, this will make money
less expensive to hold, thus incentivizing consumers to spend their money more frequently on the goods and
services they may require. We have also seen that the more quickly inflation rates rise, the more quickly the
general purchasing power of money will be eroded. Rational investors who set money aside for the future will
demand higher interest rates to compensate them for such periods of inflation. However, investors who save
for future consumption but leave their money uninvested or underinvested in low-interest-bearing accounts
will essentially lose value from their financial assets because each of their future dollars will be worth less,
carrying less purchasing power when they end up needing it for use. This relationship of saving and planning
for the future is one of the most important reasons to understand the concept of the time value of money.

Nominal versus Real Interest Rates

One of the main problems of allowing inflation to determine interest rates is that current interest rates are
actually nominal interest rates. Nominal rates are "stated," not adjusted for the effects of inflation. In order to
determine more practical real interest rates, the original nominal rate must be adjusted using an inflation
rate, such as those that are calculated and published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics within the consumer
price index (CPI).

A concept referred to as the Fisher effect, named for economist Irving Fisher, describes the relationship
between inflation and the nominal and real interest rates and is expressed using the following formula:

where i is the nominal interest rate, R is the real interest rate, and h is the expected inflation rate.

An example of the Fisher effect would be seen in the case of a bond investor who is expecting a real interest
rate of return of 6% on the bond, in an economy that is experiencing an expected inflation rate of 2%. Using
the above formula, we have

So, the nominal interest rate on the bond amounts to 8.12%, with a real interest rate of 6% within an economy
that is experiencing a 2% inflation rate. This is a logical result because in a scenario of positive inflation, a real
rate of return would always be expected to amount to less than the stated or nominal rate.
218 7 · Time Value of Money I: Single Payment Value

Interest and Savings

Savings are adversely affected by negative real interest rates. A person who holds money in the form of cash is
actually losing future purchasing value when real interest rates are negative. A saver who decides to hold
$1,000 in the form of cash for one year at a negative real interest rate of -3.65% per year will lose

                              or $36.50, in purchasing power by the end of that year.

Ordinarily, interest rates would rise to compensate for negative real rates, but this might not happen if the
Federal Reserve takes steps to maintain low interest rates to help stimulate and stabilize the economy. When
interest rates are at such low levels, investors are forced out of Treasury and money market investments due
to their extremely poor returns.

It soon becomes obvious that the time value of money is a critical concept because of its tremendous and
direct impact on the daily spending, saving, and investment decisions of the people in our society. It is
therefore extremely important that we understand how TVM and government fiscal policy can affect our
savings, investments, purchasing behavior, and our overall personal financial health.

Compounding Interest

As we discussed earlier, compound interest can be defined as interest that is being earned on interest. In
cases of compounding interest, the amount of money that is being accrued on previous amounts of earned
interest income will continue to grow with each compounding period. So, for example, if you have $1,000 in a
savings account and it is earning interest at a 10% annual rate and is compounded every year for a period of
five years, the compounding will allow for growth after one year to an amount of $1,100. This comprises the
original principal of $1,000 plus $100 in interest. In year two, you would actually be earning interest on the
total amount from the previous compounding period--the $1,100 amount.

So, to continue with this example, by the end of year two, you would have earned $1,210 ($1,100 plus $110 in
interest). If you continue on until the end of year five, that $1,000 will have grown to approximately $1,610.
Now, if we consider that the highest annual inflation rate over the last 20 years has been 3%, then in this
scenario, choosing to invest your present money in an account where interest is being compounded leaves
you in a much better position than you would be in if you did not invest your money at all. The concept of the
time value of money puts this entire idea into context for us, leading to more informed decisions on personal
saving and investing.

It is important to understand that interest does not always compound annually, as assumed in the examples
we have already covered. In some cases, interest can be compounded quarterly, monthly, daily, or even
continuously. The general rule to apply is that the more frequent the compounding period, the greater the
future value of a savings amount, a bond, or any other financial instrument. This is, of course, assuming that
all other variables are constant.

The math for this remains the same, but it is important that you be careful with your treatment and usage of
rate (r) and number of periods (n) in your calculations.

For example, $1,000 invested at 6% for a year compounded annually would be worth
                                           . But that same $1,000 invested for that same period of time--one year--and

earning interest at the same annual rate but compounded monthly would grow to
                                               , because the interest paid each month is earning interest on interest at a 6%

rate. Note that we represent r as the interest paid per period  and n as the number

of periods (12 months in a year;                     ) rather than the number of years, which is only one.

Continuing with our example, that same $1,000 in an account with interest compounded quarterly, or four

times a year, would grow to                          in one year. Note that this final amount ends up

being greater than the annually compounded future value of $1,060.00 and slightly less than the monthly

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            7.4 · Applications of TVM in Finance 219

compounded future value of $1.061.67, which would appear to make logical sense.

The total differences in future values among annual, monthly, and quarterly compounding in these examples
are insignificant, amounting to less than $1.70 in total. However, when working with larger amounts, higher
interest rates, more frequent compounding periods, and longer terms, compounding periods and frequency
become far more important and can generate some exceptionally large differences in future values.

Ten million dollars at 12% growth for one year and compounded annually amounts to

                        , while 10 million dollars on the same terms but compounded quarterly will

produce                 . Most wealthy and rational investors and savers would be

very pleased to earn that additional $55,088.10 by simply having their funds in an account that features

quarterly compounding.

In another example, $200 at 60% interest, compounded annually for six years, becomes
                                       , while this same amount compounded quarterly grows to
                                          .

An amount of $1 at 3%, compounded annually for 100 years, will be worth                          . The same
dollar at the same interest rate, compounded monthly over the course of a century, will grow to

                                           .

This would all seem to make sense due to the fact that in situations when compounding increases in
frequency, interest income is being received during the year as opposed to at the end of the year and thus
grows more rapidly to become a larger and more valuable sum of money. This is important because we know
through the concept of TVM that having money now is more useful to us than having that same amount of
money at some later point in time.

The Rule of 72

The rule of 72 is a simple and often very useful mathematical shortcut that can help you estimate the impact of
any interest or growth rate and can be used in situations ranging from financial calculations to projections of
population growth. The formula for the rule of 72 is expressed as the unknown (the required amount of time
to double a value) calculated by taking the number 72 and dividing it by the known interest rate or growth
rate. When using this formula, it is important to note that the rate should be expressed as a whole integer, not
as a percentage. So, as a result, we have

This formula can be extremely practical when working with financial estimates or projections and for
understanding how compound interest can have a dramatic effect on an original amount or monetary
balance.

Following are just a few examples of how the rule of 72 can help you solve problems very quickly and very
easily, often enabling you to solve them "in your head," without the need for a calculator or spreadsheet.

Let's say you are interested in knowing how long it will take your savings account balance to double. If your

account earns an interest rate of 9%, your money will take  or 8, years to double. However, if you are

earning only 6% on this same investment, your money will take , or 12, years to double.

Now let's say you have a specific future purchasing need and you know that you will need to double your
money in five years. In this case, you would be required to invest it at an interest rate of , or 14.4%.
Through these sample examples, it is easy to see how relatively small changes in a growth or interest rate can
have significant impact on the time required for a balance to double in size.

To further illustrate some uses of the rule of 72, let's say we have a scenario in which we know that a country's
gross domestic product is growing at 4% a year. By using the rule of 72 formula, we can determine that it will
220 7 · Time Value of Money I: Single Payment Value

take the economy 72/4, or 18, years to effectively double.

Now, if the economic growth slips to 2%, the economy will double in , or 36, years. However, if the rate of

growth increases to 11%, the economy will effectively double in  , or 6.55, years. By performing such

calculations, it becomes obvious that reducing the time it takes to grow an economy, or increasing its rate of

growth, could end up being very important to a population, given its current level of technological innovation

and development.

It is also very easy to use the rule of 72 to express future costs being impacted by inflation or future savings
amounts that are earning interest.

To apply another example, if the inflation rate in an economy were to increase from 2% to 3%, consumers
would lose half of the purchasing power of their money. This is calculated as the value of their money doubling
in , or 24, years as compared to , or 36, years--quite a substantial difference.

Now, let's say that tuition costs at a certain college are increasing at a rate of 7% per year, which happens to
be greater than current inflation rates. In this case, tuition costs would end up doubling in , or about 10.3,
years.

In an example related to personal finance, we can say that if you happen to have an annual percentage rate of

24% interest on your credit card and you do not make any payments to reduce your balance, the total amount

you owe to the credit card company will double in only      , or 3, years.

So, as we have seen, the rule of 72 can clearly demonstrate how a relatively small difference of 1 percentage
point in GDP growth or inflation rates can have significant effects on any short- or long-term economic
forecasting models.

It is important to understand that the rule of 72 can be applied in any scenario where we have a quantity or an

amount that is in the process of growing or is expected to grow for any period of time into the future. A good

nonfinancial use of the rule of 72 might be to apply it to some population projections. For example, an increase

in a country's population growth rate from 2% to 3% could present a serious problem for the planning of

facilities and infrastructure in that country. Instead of needing to double overall economic capacity in  or

36, years, capacity would have to be expanded in only , or 24, years. It is easy to see how dramatic an

effect this would be when we consider that the entire schedule for growth or infrastructure would be reduced

by 12 years due to a simple and relatively small 1% increase in population growth.

Investing and Risk

Investing is usually a sound financial strategy if you have the money to do so. When investing, however, there
are certain risks you should always consider first when applying the concepts of the time value of money. For
example, making the decision to take $1,000 and invest it in your favorite company, even if it is expected to
provide a 5% return each year, is not a guarantee that you will earn that return--or any return at all, for that
matter. Instead, as with any investment, you will be accepting the risk of losing some or even all of your money
in exchange for the opportunity to beat inflation and increase your future overall wealth. Essentially, it is risk
and return that are responsible for the entire idea of the time value of money.

Risk and return are the factors that will cause a rational person to believe that a dollar risked should end up
earning more than that single dollar.

To summarize, the concept of the time value of money and the related TVM formulas are extremely important
because they can be used in different circumstances to help investors and savers understand the value of their
money today relative to its earning potential in the future. TVM is critical to understanding the effect that
inflation has on your money and why saving your money early can help increase the value of your savings
dollars by giving them time to grow and outpace the effects of inflation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                       7.4 · Applications of TVM in Finance 221

Opportunity Costs

The concept of opportunity cost arises from the idea that there will always be possible options that are
sacrificed with every option we decide on or for every choice that we make. For example, let's consider the
decision to go to college after you graduate from high school. This decision, as with just about any other, will
involve evaluating opportunity costs. If you choose to go to college, this will result in your sacrificing four years
of potential earnings that you could have had if you had decided to take a job instead of attending school.
Also, in addition to the lost salary, you would be losing out on four years of work experience that could have
had a positive impact on your résumé or your future earnings prospects.

Of course, the entire idea behind furthering one's education is that you are hopeful that by choosing to go to
college, you will increase the likelihood of earning a greater salary over the course of your lifetime than you
would have if you had chosen to join the workforce directly out of high school. So, this ends up being a bit of a
risk, but one that you have considered. The idea is that you are hoping for a more significant payoff down the
road than if you had made the decision not to continue with your studies. When it comes to opportunity costs
and the time value of money, it is obvious that there will always be costs associated with every forgone
financial opportunity we pass on when we make a different choice. The logical individual can only hope that
these choices produce a better end result than if we had made different choices and pursued any of our
forgone alternatives. This also applies in situations where we may sit idly by and decide to take no action at all.

For example, if you are putting $1,000 in a savings account to save for a house, you may be giving up an
opportunity to grow that money in an investment account that would earn a greater rate of return. In another
example, being able to calculate the future value of your money will tell you that instead of investing, you
probably should be paying down your 24% APR credit card debt that is costing you hundreds of dollars a
month--hundreds of dollars more than you might earn from an investment account.
222 7 · Summary

     Summary

7.1 Now versus Later Concepts

This section discussed the underlying concepts of the time value of money (TVM). Because it is possible to earn
interest income on cash that you decide to deposit in an investment or an interest-bearing account, money
that you have now or receive sooner will be more valuable to you than the same amount of money received
later.

7.2 Time Value of Money (TVM) Basics

Future value refers to the value that a current amount will eventually grow into at a given interest rate over a
specific period of time. The single-period scenario is one way in which future amounts are calculated.
Compounding, which is interest earned on interest, also affects the future value of money.

7.3 Methods for Solving Time Value of Money Problems

Calculations can be used to determine future and present dollar amounts, discount and growth rates, and
periods of time required for specific growth. Time value of money problems can be solved using mathematical
equations, calculators with financial functions, and spreadsheets. A useful tool for conceptualizing present
value and future value problems is a timeline. A timeline is a visual, linear representation of the timing of
periods and cash flows over a set amount of time.

7.4 Applications of TVM in Finance

The idea of the time value of money is often considered to be the cornerstone concept of the study of finance.
TVM can help investors and savers understand the value of money today relative to its earning potential in the
future. TVM is critical to understanding the effect that inflation has on money and why saving your money
early can help increase the value of your savings dollars by giving them time to grow and outpace the effects
of inflation. Of course, it is important to remember that there will always be possible options that are sacrificed
with every option you decide on and every choice you make.

     Key Terms

Bureau of Labor Statistics a group within the United States Department of Labor that is the primary fact-
    finding agency for the US government in the fields of labor, statistics, and economics; serves as the
    principal agency of the US Federal Statistical System

compounding interest the continual addition of interest to the original principal sum of a loan or deposit,
    often referred to as interest on interest

compounding period the period between points in time when interest is paid or added to the principal
consumer price index (CPI) a measure that examines the weighted average of prices of a basket of

    consumer goods and services such as transportation, food, and medical care
discount rate the interest rate used to determine the present value of future cash inflows
Federal Reserve the central bank system of the United States
financial instrument an asset or bundle of assets, including monetary contracts between parties, that can

    be bought, sold, or traded for financial gain
financial risk the possibility of losing money or purchasing power on an investment, business transaction, or

    venture or simply due to inflation
Fisher effect an economic theory created by economist Irving Fisher that describes the relationship between

    inflation and both real and nominal interest rates
future value (FV) the value that a current amount will grow to at a given interest rate over a given period of

    time
gross domestic product (GDP) the total value of goods produced and services provided in a country during

    one year

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           7 · CFA Institute 223

growth rate the percentage increase of a specific variable within a specific time period; synonymous with
   interest rate in the context of the time value of money

interest the amount of money that is paid by a borrower to a lender for the use of their money, typically
    calculated from an annualized rate

investment an asset or item acquired with the goal of generating financial gain through increased income
    or appreciation in value

liquid asset an asset that can be readily converted into cash within a short period of time
money market investments low-risk financial instruments such as T-bills, federal notes, commercial paper,

    certificates of deposit (CDs), repurchase agreements (repos), and bankers' acceptances, among others
money supply the total dollar value of legal tender that is available to consumers within an economy at any

    single point in time
opportunity cost the loss of potential gain from other alternatives when a single alternative is chosen
present value (PV) the current value of a future amount, calculated by discounting the future value back at a

    known discount or interest rate for a specified period of time
real interest rate a rate of interest that has been adjusted to account for the effects of inflation
single payment or lump sum a single payment or deposit made at one time, as opposed to a number of

    smaller payments or deposits made in installments
time value of money (TMV) the concept that an amount of money is worth more today than the exact same

    amount of money at some point in the future
Treasury investments debt obligations such as T-bills (Treasury bills), bonds, and notes issued by the US

    Department of the Treasury
underinvested describes an insufficient amount of investment or an investment that is earning an

    insufficient rate of interest
uninvested describes cash that is being held in reserve, is not invested in an account or financial instrument,

    and is not earning interest or any return

     CFA Institute

This chapter supports some of the Learning Outcome Statements (LOS) in this CFA® Level I Study Session
(https://openstax.org/r/cfainstitute_link). Reference with permission of CFA Institute.

     Multiple Choice

 1. The most basic type of financial transaction involves _______________.
      a. an amount of money that is not invested
      b. a series of equal installment amounts paid or received over a period of time
       c. a simple, one-time amount of cash that can be either a receipt or a payment
      d. None of the above

 2. If a discount (or interest) rate has a positive value, then the future value of any amount deposited in an
     interest-bearing account will _______________.
      a. be less than the present value
      b. be equal to the present value
       c. be greater than the present value
      d. decline over time

 3. If the discount (or interest) rate used to calculate the present value of a future payment increases, the
     calculated present value will do which of the following?
      a. Increase
      b. Decrease
224 7 · Review Questions

       c. Remain the same
      d. Increase as the period of time shortens

 4. The discount rate that is required to equate a future payment of $500 in three years to a present value of
     $400 is _______________.
      a. 4.7%
      b. 6.5%
       c. 7.7%
      d. 8.8%

 5. If compounding periods increase in frequency and all else remains the same, the dollar values of any
     resulting future value calculations will _______________.
      a. increase
      b. remain the same
       c. decrease
      d. None of the above

     Review Questions

 1. All other things being the same, would you prefer a bank account that compounds interest quarterly or
     one that compounds interest semiannually?

 2. Briefly describe the concept of future value within the context of the larger overall concept of the time
     value of money.

 3. Which of the following two options will give you the greatest future value: (A) an initial deposit of $100
     earning 20% per year, compounded annually and left to grow for 10 years, or (B) an initial deposit of $75
     earning 12% per year, compounded monthly and left to grow for 15 years?

 4. If a savings account pays interest on a quarterly basis and you are performing future value calculations on
     deposited amounts, how can you calculate the rate?

 5. Briefly describe the relationship among consumer savings, purchasing power, and inflation.

     Problems

 1. Find the future value of $100 in five years at 5% interest.
 2. Find the future value of $1,800 in 3 years at 8% interest.
 3. How much would you have to deposit now to have $15,000 in eight years if interest is 7%?
 4. What is the present value of $5,000 that will be paid to you eight years from today at 8% interest?
 5. How many years will it take a $700 balance to grow into $900 in an account earning 5%?
 6. If you borrow $1,000 and pay back $1,728 in three years, what annual rate of interest are you paying?
 7. How long will it take you to triple your money at 8%?
 8. A company's sales were $250 million in 2019. If sales grow at 6% per year, how large will they be 10 years

     later, in 2029 (as expressed in millions)?
 9. A US government bond in the amount of $1,000 will mature in six years, has no coupon payments, and

     carries an interest rate of 8%. What is the value of this bond today?
10. You spend $725.00 to purchase a $1,000 bond that will have no coupon payments and matures in 12 years.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          7 · Video Activity 225

      What interest rate will you be earning on this bond?

11. At what interest rate would you be ambivalent about receiving either $50,000 10 years from now or
      $35,000 today?

12. Vance Corporation had earnings last year of $3.25 per share. The company has experienced 8% annual
      growth over the last several years, and management expects that growth rate to continue. Based on this
      information, after how long will earnings per share double?

13. What is the amount of total interest dollars earned on a $5,000 deposit earning 6% for 20 years?

14. You have decided that you will sell your $300,000 house when it appreciates in value to $500,000. If houses
      are appreciating at an average annual rate of 5% in your neighborhood, for approximately how long will
      you be staying in your house?

15. You just won some money in the lottery and would like to save a portion of it so that you will have $50,000
      to put a down payment on a house in five years. Your bank pays a 5% rate of interest. How much money
      will you have to set aside from the lottery winnings?

16. Bauer Bookstore sells books before they are published. Today, they offered the book Journeys in Finance
      for $14.20, but the book will not be published for another two years. Upon publishing, the price of the
      book will be $24.00. What is the discount rate Bauer Bookstore is offering its customers for this book?

17. One of your professional goals is to one day earn a six-figure salary ($100,000). You hope to accomplish
      this objective within the next 30 years. Salaries grow at 3.75% per year in your field of work. What
      beginning salary will you need in order to reach this 30-year goal?

18. How much will $25,000 grow to in five years at a 5% annual rate that is compounded quarterly?

19. If Eisenberg Industries revenues have increased from $30 million to $90 million over a 10-year period,
      what has been their annual rate of growth?

20. If you are scheduled to receive $4,000 six years from today and the discount rate is 8.5%, what is the
      present value of this payment?

21. If you were to open a savings account that earns 3% interest and is compounded quarterly, what would be
      the total amount in your account after 10 years if you made an opening deposit of $9,500?

22. You are considering four possible options for your new savings account. You plan to deposit $13,000 and
      leave this amount in the account for 20 years with no additional deposits or withdrawals. All of these
      account options would earn 6% interest, but each one has a different compounding frequency, listed
      below. What would be the value of each account at the end of the 20-year period?
     a. Annually
     b. Semiannually
     c. Quarterly
     d. Monthly

     Video Activity

Time Value of Money Calculations with Financial Calculator

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/Time-Value-of-Money-Calculations)
 1. Name and describe the five primary keys on a financial calculator that are used to solve time value of

     money problems.

 2. Following the instructions laid out in this video, practice calculating the following TVM variables using
     these inputs:
226 7 · Video Activity

Find a Future Value (FV): Calculate FV when

                                                  , and            .

Find a Present Value (PV): Calculate PV when

                                                  , and         .

Find the Number of Periods (N) when

                                                  , and               .

Find the Interest Rate (I/Y) when

                                                  , and               .

Find the Payment (PMT) when

                                                         and          .

Continue to practice using a financial calculator to solve various time value of money problems using
different input factors until you feel comfortable with the process of using a calculator to solve TVM
problems.

Time Value of Money Using Excel with 10 Examples

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/Money_Using_Excel)
 3. Where within the Excel spreadsheet and its different menus (under what menu button option) can you

     find the different functions that will enable you to solve for different time value of money factors?

4. Following the instructions laid out in this video, practice calculating the following TVM variables in Excel.

Find a Future Value (FV): Calculate FV when

                                                  , and            .

Find a Present Value (PV): Calculate PV when

                                                  , and         .

Find the Number of Periods (N) when

                                                  , and               .

Find the Interest Rate (I/Y) when

                                                  , and               .

Find the Payment (PMT) when

                                                         , and        .

Go back and check the answers to these questions that you ended up with under the video Time Value of
Money Calculations with Financial Calculator. You should get the exact same answers when using both
methods (calculator and Excel).

Continue to practice using Excel to solve various time value of money problems using different input
factors until you feel comfortable with the process of using spreadsheets to solve TVM problems.

Access for free at openstax.org
8 · Why It Matters                                                                                                               227

 8
              Time Value of Money II: Equal Multiple Payments

Figure 8.1 The value of an investment generally represents our expectations of all future cash flows from that investment, once
discounted. (credit: modification of "Money" by Ervins Strauhmanis/flickr CC BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline

  8.1 Perpetuities
  8.2 Annuities
  8.3 Loan Amortization
  8.4 Stated versus Effective Rates
  8.5 Equal Payments with a Financial Calculator and Excel

      Why It Matters

Although this text is directed at business finance students, our daily decisions as consumers are largely based
on money and finance to just as great an extent. An old adage in finance claims, "If you aren't in control of
your money, your money is controlling you." Fortunately, learning to manage your money is not difficult if
you're disciplined and understand some simple techniques. For example, several years ago, the author was
negotiating for a three-year auto loan from a well-known regional dealer, who was offering an interest rate of
2%. When the manager left the room for a few minutes, we pulled out a financial calculator and proved in less
than a minute that the actual interest rate in the payments he was proposing was nearly double the quoted
and advertised rate.

In addition to understanding how the loan process works, which improves your negotiation skills when
borrowing, businesses and individuals can better control their investments by understanding basic rules of
finance, particularly as seen in this and the preceding chapter. Assume you pledge to invest $1,000 per year at
5% return per year and are curious about how much you will have accumulated by age 60. If you begin at age
30, you will have $69,760; if you begin at age 20, you will have $126,840. Can the extra 10 years make that much
of a difference? We'll see that indeed they can, and the calculations required to prove it can take less than two
minutes.

As another example, many professionals confuse income and wealth during their career growth. In their
popular book The Millionaire Next Door: The Surprising Secrets of America's Wealthy, authors Thomas Stanley
228 8 · Time Value of Money II: Equal Multiple Payments

       and William Danko illustrate these terms with a flowing river. A river is in constant movement, and as the flow
       or depth increases, this is comparable to one's income increasing through the promotions, salary increases,
       and bonuses one receives. Unfortunately, many individuals then increase their spending habits in response,
       justifying a better car, a second home, or more lavish vacations. Wealth, in contrast, is comparable to taking a
       bucket of water from the river and holding it aside in a tank for oneself. Financial professionals often call this
       "paying yourself first." Stanley and Danko list this among the "secrets" referenced in the title of their book.

      8.1 Perpetuities

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Define perpetuity.
         · Explain how perpetuities are valued.

       In Time Value of Money I, we learned that the value of money changes with the passage of time. Decision-
       makers consider how investments, projects, and even opportunity costs gain value as we move forward into
       the future. They similarly consider how value in the future can be reduced to a value in present or past
       periods. We saw that these value projections are called determination of future value (compounding, moving
       forward on a timeline) or present value (discounting, moving backward on a timeline). The easiest way to
       visualize this movement through time, whether forward or backward, is by use of a timeline.

       Throughout the first chapter on the time value of money, we were analyzing a single amount. In this chapter,
       we deal with a stream of payments made periodically--in other words, payments made or received regularly
       over a span of time. We begin with the illustration of a perpetuity.

      What Is a Perpetuity?

       A perpetuity is a series of payments or receipts that continues forever, or perpetually. One of the best ways to
       analyze the basics of an annuity (the stream of payments to be paid or received in the future) is by starting
       with a perpetuity. The most common examples of perpetuities in the author's experience are college chair
       endowments and preferred stock.

       If you gift $1,500,000 to a college to name a professor's chair for your family, you might specify that the money
       must be held in perpetuity and invested by the college to yield a fixed 3%. The college will take those proceeds
       of the investment, leaving your original $1,500,000 intact, and use the annual interest of $45,000 to fund a
       portion of the professor's salary.

       Another common example is preferred stock. Most preferred stock issues carry a fixed and predetermined
       rate of dividend. If we assume that the dividend will not change in future years, then preferred dividend
       shareholders will receive a fixed amount of money in future years--assuming, of course, that the company's
       board of directors declares the dividends sufficient to fund these requirements. If we assume that the dividend
       is declared and paid and that it remains constant, this represents a perpetuity.

       For example, Shaw Inc. has issued 100,000 shares of preferred stock with a stated value of $50 and a 4%
       dividend. Therefore, if they can fund and decide to declare dividends for the full amount, they will pay out
       $200,000, or $2.00 per preferred share. Because shares such as these are created with the intention of
       continuity, the owner of this preferred stock can theoretically expect this dividend income stream in
       perpetuity.

       To place a current market value on this stream of future income, how much should an investor pay for one
       share of this preferred stock? The calculation is a present value. The amount the investor pays today for that
       one share is equal to the annual dividend (assuming it is declared and paid) divided by the rate of return. But
       be careful--it is not the rate on the face of the preferred stock but the required rate of return, the "market
       rate" that investors expect from a stock of this level of risk. We must also note an important fact affecting all

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   8.1 · Perpetuities 229

investment valuations: the value of an investment generally represents our expectations of all future cash
flows from that investment, discounted to today's dollars.

Because a perpetuity is a stream of payments continuing indefinitely, determining the future value isn't
possible. Determining the present value, however, is possible, although one might wonder how. As we learned
earlier, the greater the amount of time used in a present value calculation, the smaller the amount of dollars
needed at the beginning, regardless of the interest rate involved. Therefore, when we discount each payment
in an infinite series, remembering that we would then add them together once we discount them to the
present, the infinite payments become negligible at some point and will no longer have a significant impact on
today's value. To grow to one dollar 70 years from now, even at a growth rate of 5% per year, we would only
need $0.0329--not even four cents. Keeping all other facts the same, if we had 100 years to grow an
investment to one dollar, we would only need 0.76 cents--not even a whole penny! There is no question that
the effect of time is substantial and dramatic.

The study of perpetuities in corporate finance is a first step to understanding valuation models of certain
investments, such as the dividend discount model and the constant growth model, to be addressed in other
chapters. Our ability to discount future cash flows, even infinite cash flows, to a present value is a clue to the
price at which a company's stock might trade. From a personal financial planning perspective, the individual
investor is also better able to be certain that they are paying a fair price for holdings in their portfolio. For
purposes of long-term or retirement planning, the investor must consider that a fixed and unchanging
dividend, such as from preferred stock, might not adequately protect the holder from inflation in times of
rising prices.

How to Value a Perpetuity

Given these facts, how do we place a value on a perpetuity? Let's keep the preferred stock example for Shaw
Inc. in mind. The holder of one share will expect to receive a $2.00 dividend for every share owned. Although a
perpetuity may allow for growth of that dividend, we will hold that constant now. We must know one
additional fact: the required rate of return. This is our random variable, which can cause fluctuation in the
price of the preferred stock. Let's assume that the required rate of return, which we'll call RS, is 7%. This is the
rate of return that the market expects in order to take on the risk of an investment such as Shaw.

Determination of the price of Shaw's preferred stock becomes quite simple because the expected annual cash
flow should not change, making it a constant perpetuity. The constant perpetuity formula is

where PV is the price of the preferred stock, C is the constant dividend, and Rs is the required rate of return.
By substitution,

The price one should pay for a share of Shaw's preferred stock is $28.57.

Here's another constant perpetuity to try. The preferred stock of Rooney Corporation pays an annual dividend

of $1.75 per share. If the required rate of return in the market for shares such as Rooney's is 5.8%, at what

price should these preferred shares be trading? The answer is  , or $30.17.

Some investments might involve a growing perpetuity. In this case, some degree of change in the amount of
the dividend is expected. The formula is altered slightly to include a rate of growth in the denominator, noted
as G, making the growing perpetuity formula
230 8 · Time Value of Money II: Equal Multiple Payments

To illustrate a growing perpetuity, let's revisit Rooney Corp.'s stock, with its annual dividend of $1.75 and a
required rate of return in the market of 5.8%. If the expected dividend growth rate G is 1.2%, then the value

changes to        , or $38.04. The expectation of growth in the dividend provides incentive for the

investor to pay a higher price.

THINK IT THROUGH

A Growing Perpetuity

Savo Corporation. While we think of perpetuities as being static, with a constant benefit or dividend, as
seen above, they might have the possibility of growth. Let's assume that our preferred stock in Savo
Corporation is expected to grow at a rate of 0.2% per year. Its annual dividend per share is $4.00, and its
required rate of return in the market is 3%. If this is a constant dividend stock, like most preferred stock, its
price would be expected to approximate

or

When we factor in the 0.2% annual growth in the dividend, what does the price per share become?
Solution:

THINK IT THROUGH

College Endowment

In the case of an endowment for a college chair, as noted in the beginning of this section, instead of a
dividend amount for a preferred stock, we would use the desired amount of the distribution that the chair
would receive as part of their compensation package. Assume the college can invest this money at a fixed
3.5% annual rate. If you wish to gift the college enough funds to be held in perpetuity to produce $75,000
each year for that professor, how would you calculate this?

Solution:

We modify the constant perpetuity formula:

  In one year, $2,142,857 grows to
  The earnings (gift) of $75,000 are withdrawn to compensate the professor, and we are left with the amount
  originally endowed, $2,142,857:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     8.2 · Annuities 231

8.2 Annuities

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Define annuity.
  · Distinguish between an ordinary annuity and an annuity due.
  · Calculate the present value of an ordinary annuity and an annuity due.
  · Explain how annuities may be used in lotteries and structured settlements.
  · Explain how annuities might be used in retirement planning.

Calculating the Present Value of an Annuity

An annuity is a stream of fixed periodic payments to be paid or received in the future. Present or future values
of these streams of payments can be calculated by applying time value of money formulas to each of these
payments. We'll begin with determining the present value.

Before exploring present value, it's helpful to analyze the behavior of a stream of payments over time. Assume
that we commit to a program of investing $1,000 at the end of each year for five years, earning 7%
compounded annually throughout. The high rate is locked in based partly on our commitment beginning
today, even though we will invest no money until the end of the first year. Refer to the timeline shown in Table
8.1.

                          Year      0  1  2  3  4  5

               Balance Forward ($) 0.00 0.00 1,000.00 2,070.00 3,214.90 4,439.94

               Interest Earned ($)     0.00 70.00 144.90 225.04 310.80

               Principal Added ($)     1,000.00 1,000.00 1,000.00 1,000.00 1,000.00

               New Balance ($)         1,000.00 2,070.00 3,214.90 4,439.94 5,750.74

               Table 8.1

At the end of the first year, we deposit the first $1,000 in our fund. Therefore, it has not yet had an opportunity
to earn us any interest. The "new balance" number beneath is the cumulative amount in our fund, which then
carries to the top of the column for the next year. In year 2, that first amount will earn 7% interest, and at the
end of year 2, we add our second $1,000. Our cumulative balance is therefore $2,070, which then carries up to
the top of year 3 and becomes the basis of the interest calculation for that year. At the end of the fifth year,
our investing arrangement ends, and we've accumulated $5,750.74, of which $5,000 represents the money we
invested and the other $750.74 represents accrued interest on both our invested funds and the accumulated
interest from past periods.

Notice two important aspects that might appear counterintuitive: (1) we've "wasted" the first year because we
deposited no funds at the beginning of this plan, and our first $1,000 begins working for us only at the
beginning of the second year; and (2) our fifth and final investment earns no interest because it's deposited at
the end of the last year. We will address these two issues from a practical application point of view shortly.

Keeping this illustration in mind, we will first focus on finding the present value of an annuity. Assume that you
wish to receive $25,000 each year from an existing fund for five years, beginning one year from now. This
stream of annual $25,000 payments represents an annuity. Because the first payment will be received one year
from now, we specifically call this an ordinary annuity. We will look at an alternative to ordinary annuities
later. How much money do we need in our fund today to accomplish this stream of payments if our remaining
balance will always be earning 8% annually? Although we'll gradually deplete the fund as we withdraw
periodic payments of the same amount, whatever funds remain in the account will always be earning interest.
232 8 · Time Value of Money II: Equal Multiple Payments

       Before we investigate a formula to calculate this amount, we can illustrate the objective: determining the
       present value of this future stream of payments, either manually or using Microsoft Excel. We can take each of
       the five payments of $25,000 and discount them to today's value using the simple present value formula:

       where FV is the future value, PV is the present value, r is the interest rate, and n is the number of periods.
       For example, the first $25,000 is discounted by the equation as follows:

Proof that $23,148.15 will grow to $25,000 in one year at 8% interest:

If we use this same method for each of the five years, increasing the exponent n for each year, we see the
result in Table 8.2.

                                  Year  Calculation    Result
                                    1                $23,148.15
                                    2                $21,433.47
                                    3                $19,846.81
                                    4                $18,375.75
                                    5                $17,014.58
                                                     $99,818.76
                                 TOTAL

                                 Table 8.2 Present Value of Future Payments

We begin with the amount calculated in our table, $99,818.76. Before any money is withdrawn, a year's worth
of interest at 8% is compounded and added to our balance. Then our first $25,000 is withdrawn, leaving us
with $82,804.26. This process continues until the end of five years, when, aside from a minor rounding
difference, the fund has "done its job" and is equal to zero. However, we can make this simpler. Because each
payment withdrawn (or added, as we will see later) is the same, we can calculate the present value of an
annuity in one step using an equation. Rather than the multiple steps above, we will use the following
equation:

where PVa is the present value of the annuity and PYMT is the amount of one payment.

In this example, PYMT is $25,000 at the end of each of five years. Note that the greater the number of periods
and/or the size of the amount borrowed, the greater the chances of large rounding errors. We have used six
decimal places in our calculations, though the actual time value of money factor, combining interest and time,
can be much longer. Therefore, our solutions will often use  rather than the equal sign.

By substitution, and then following the proper order of operations:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                       8.2 · Annuities 233

In both cases, barring a rounding difference caused by decimal expansion, we come to the same result using
the equation as when we calculate each of multiple years. It's important to note that rounding differences can
become significant when dealing with larger multipliers, as in the financing of a multimillion-dollar machine or
facility. In this text, we will ignore them.
In conclusion, five payments of $25,000, or $125,000 in total, can be funded today with $99,817.81, with the
difference being obtained from interest always accumulating on the remaining balance at 8%. The running
balance is obtained by calculating the year's interest on the previous balance, adding it to that balance, and
subtracting the $25,000 that is withdrawn on the last day of the year. In the last (fifth) year, just enough
interest will accrue to bring the balance to the $25,000 needed to complete the fifth payment.
A common use of the PVa is with large-money lotteries. Let's assume you win the North Dakota Lottery for
$1.2 million, and they offer you $120,000 per year for 10 years, beginning one year from today. We will ignore
taxes and other nonmathematical considerations throughout these discussions and problems. The Lottery
Commission will likely contact you with an alternative: would you like to accept that stream of payments ... or
would you like to accept a lump sum of $787,000 right now instead? Can you complete a money-based
analysis of these alternatives? Based purely on the dollars, no, you cannot. The reason is that you can't
compare future amounts to present amounts without considering the effect of time--that is, the time value of
money. Therefore, we need an interest rate that we can use as a discounting factor to place these alternatives
on the same playing field by expressing them in terms of today's dollars, the present value. Let's use 9%. If we
discount the future stream of fixed payments (an ordinary annuity, as the payments are identical and they
begin one year from now), we can then compare that result to the cash lump sum that the Lottery Commission
is offering you instead.
By substitution, and following the proper order of operations:

All things being equal, that expected future stream of ten $120,000 payments is worth approximately $770,119
today. Now you can compare like numbers, and the $787,000 cash lump sum is worth more than the
discounted future payments. That is the choice one would accept without considering such aspects as
taxation, desire, need, confidence in receiving the future payments, or other variables.
234 8 · Time Value of Money II: Equal Multiple Payments

      Calculating the Present Value of an Annuity Due

       Earlier, we defined an ordinary annuity. A variation is the annuity due. The difference between the two is one
       period. That's all--just one additional period of interest. An ordinary annuity assumes that there is a one-
       period lag between the start of a stream of payments and the actual first payment. In contrast, an annuity due
       assumes that payments begin immediately, as in the lottery example above. We would assume that you would
       receive the first annual lottery check of $120,000 immediately, not a year from now. In summary, whether
       calculating future value (covered in the next section) or present value of an annuity due, the one-year lag is
       eliminated, and we begin immediately.
       Since the difference is simply one additional period of time, we can adjust for this easily by taking the formula
       for an ordinary annuity and multiplying by one additional period. One more period, of course, is (1 + i). Recall
       from Time Value of Money I that the formula for compounding is (1 + i)N, where i is the interest rate and N is
       the number of periods. The superscript N does not apply because it represents 1, for one additional period,
       and the power of 1 can be ignored. Therefore, faced with an annuity due problem, we solve as if it were an
       ordinary annuity, but we multiply by (1 + i) one more time.
       In our original example from this section, we wished to withdraw $25,000 each year for five years from a fund
       that we would establish now. We determined how much that fund should be worth today if we intend to
       receive our first payment one year from now. Throughout this fund's life, it will earn 8% annually. This time,
       let's assume we'll withdraw our first payment immediately, at point zero, making this an annuity due. Because
       we're trying to determine how much our starting balance should be, it makes sense that we must begin with a
       larger number. Why? Because we're pulling our first payment out immediately, so less money will remain to
       start compounding to the amount we need to fund all five of our planned payments! Our rule can be stated as
       follows:
       Whether one is calculating present value or future value, the result of an annuity due must always be larger
       than that of an ordinary annuity, all other facts remaining constant. Here is the stream of solutions for the
       example above, but please notice that we will multiply by (1 + i), one additional period, following the same
       order of operations:

       That's how much we must start our fund with today, before we earn any interest or draw out any money. Note
       that it's larger than the $99,817.81 that would be required for an ordinary annuity. It must be, because we're
       about to diminish our compounding power with an immediate withdrawal, so we have to begin with a larger
       amount.
       We notice several things:
        1. The formula must change because the annual payment is subtracted first, prior to the calculation of

             annual interest.
        2. We accomplish the same result, aside from an insignificant rounding difference: the fund is depleted once

             the last payment is withdrawn.
        3. The last payment is withdrawn on the first day of the final year, not the last. Therefore, no interest is

             earned during the fifth and final year.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                       8.2 · Annuities 235

To reinforce this, let's use the same approach for our lottery example above. Reviewing the facts, you have a
choice of receiving 10 annual payments of your $1.2 million winnings, each worth $120,000, and you discount
at a rate of 9%. The only difference is that this time, you can receive your first $120,000 right away; you don't
have to wait a year. This is now an annuity due. We solve it just as before, except that we multiply by one
additional period of interest, (1 + i):

Again, this result must be larger than the amount we determined when this was calculated as an ordinary
annuity.
The calculations above, representing the present values of ordinary annuities and annuities due, have been
presented on an annual basis. In Time Value of Money I, we saw that compounding and discounting
calculations can be based on non-annual periods as well, such as quarterly or monthly compounding and
discounting. This aspect, quite common in periodic payment calculations, will be explored in a later section of
this chapter.

Calculating Annuities Used in Structured Settlements

In addition to lottery payouts, annuity calculations are often used in structured settlements by attorneys at
law. If you win a $450,000 settlement for an insurance claim, the opposing party may ask you to accept an
annuity so that they can pay you in installments rather than a lump sum of cash. What would a fair cash
distribution by year mean? If you have a preferred discount rate (the percentage we all must know to
calculate the time value of money) of 6% and you expect equal distributions of $45,000 over 10 years,
beginning one year from now, you can use the present value of an annuity formula to compare the
alternatives:

By substitution:

If the opposing attorney offered you a lump sum of cash less than that, all things equal, you would refuse it; if
236 8 · Time Value of Money II: Equal Multiple Payments

       the lump sum were greater than that, you would likely accept it.
       What if you negotiate the first payment to be made to you immediately, turning this ordinary annuity into an
       annuity due? As noted above, we simply multiply by one additional period of interest, (1 + 0.06). Repeating the
       last step of the solution above and then multiplying by (1 + 0.06), we determine that

You would insist on that number as an absolute minimum before you would consider accepting the offered
stream of payments.

To further verify that ordinary annuity can be converted into an annuity due by multiplying the solution by one
additional period's worth of interest before applying the annuity factor to the payment, we can divide the
difference between the two results by the value of the original annuity. When the result is expressed as a
percent, it must be the same as the rate of interest used in the annuity calculations. Using our example of an
annuity with five payments of $25,000 at 8%, we compare the present values of the ordinary annuity of
$99,817.81 and the annuity due of $107,803.24.

The result shows that the present value of the annuity due is 8% higher than the present value of the ordinary
annuity.

Calculating the Future Value of an Annuity

In the previous section, we addressed discounting a periodic stream of payments from the future to the
present. We are also interested in how to project the future value of a series of payments. In this case, an
investment may be made periodically. Keeping with the definition of an annuity, if the amount of periodic
investment is always the same, we may take a one-step shortcut to calculate the future value of that stream by
using the formula presented below:

where FVa is the future value of the annuity, PYMT is a one-time payment or receipt in the series, r is the
interest rate, and n is the number of periods.

As we did in our section on present values of annuities, we will begin with an ordinary annuity and then
proceed to an annuity due.

Let's assume that you lock in a contract for an investment opportunity at 4% per year, but you cannot make
the first investment until one year from now. This is counterintuitive for an investor, perhaps, but because it is
the basis of the formula and procedures for ordinary annuities, we will accept this assumption. You plan to
invest $3,000 at the end of each year. How much money will you have at the end of five years?

Let's start by placing this on a timeline like the one appearing earlier in this chapter (see Table 8.3):

           Year                  0  1  2  3  4  5

Balance Forward ($) 0.00 0.00 3,000.00 6,120.00 9,364.80 12,739.39

Interest Earned ($)                 0.00 120.00 244.80 374.59 509.58

Principal Added ($)                 3,000.00 3,000.00 3,000.00 3,000.00 3,000.00

New Balance ($)                     3,000.00 6,120.00 9,364.80 12,739.39 16,248.97

Table 8.3

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                       8.2 · Annuities 237

As we explained earlier when describing ordinary annuities, the payment for year 1 is not invested until the
last day of that year, so year 1 is wasted as a compounding opportunity. Therefore, the amount only
compounds for four years rather than five. Also, our fifth payment is not made until the last day of our
contract in year 5, so it has no chance to earn a compounded future value. The investor has lost on both ends.
In the table above, we have made five calculations, and for a longer-term contract such as 10, 25, or 40 years,
this would be tedious. Fortunately, as with present values, this ordinary annuity can be solved in one step
because all payments are identical.
Repeating the formula, and then by substitution:

This proof emphasizes that year 1 is wasted, with no compounding because the payment is made on the last
day of year 1 rather than immediately. We lose compounding through this ordinary annuity in another way:
year 5's investment is made on the last day of this five-year contract and has no chance to accumulate interest.
A more intuitive method would be to enter a contract for an annuity due so that our first payment can be
made immediately. In this way, we don't waste the first year, and all five payments work in year 5 as well. As
stated previously, this means that annuities due will yield larger results than ordinary annuities, whether one is
discounting (PVa) or compounding (FVa).
Let's hold all facts constant with the previous example, except that we will invest at the beginning of each year,
starting immediately upon locking in this five-year contract. We follow the same technique as in the present
value section: we multiply by one additional period to convert this ordinary annuity factor into a factor for an
annuity due. Whether one is solving for a future value or a present value, the result of an annuity due must
always be larger than an ordinary annuity. With future value, we begin investing immediately, so the result will
be larger than if we waited for a period to elapse. With present value, we begin extracting funds immediately
rather than letting them work for us during the first year, so logically we would have to start with more.
Continuing our example but converting it to an annuity due, we will multiply by one additional period, (1 + i).
All else remains the same:

Let's provide one additional example of each. Assume that you have a chance to invest $15,000 per year for 10
years, earning 8% compounded annually. What amount would you have after the 10 years? If we can only
make our first payment at the end of each year, our ending value will be

However, if we can make our first payment immediately and then make subsequent payments at the start of
238 8 · Time Value of Money II: Equal Multiple Payments

       each following year, we modify the formula above by multiplying the annual payment by one additional
       period:

       THINK IT THROUGH
       Begin an Investing Program at Age 20 or 30?

         In this chapter's introductory section, Why It Matters, we posed a question about pledging to invest $1,000
         each year until you reach age 60. If you can earn a 5% annual rate of interest, how much will you have if you
         begin at age 20? What if you delay this program until age 30? The additional 10 years can make a
         surprisingly large difference. How can you calculate that difference?
         Solution:
         Perform two separate calculations comparable to the chapter examples above, using the formula for the
         future value of an ordinary annuity. You plan to make the first investment immediately, making this an
         annuity due, so you will multiply by one additional period, (1 + 0.05). Notice that the only difference
         between the two calculations is the exponent N, representing the number of periods.
         Thirty years (starting at age 30):

         Forty years (starting at age 20):

         Waiting 10 years before committing to this program comes with a surprisingly high cost--a loss of almost
         82% of the potential value.

      How Annuities Are Used for Retirement Planning

       On a final note, how might annuities be used for retirement planning? A person might receive a lump-sum
       windfall from an investment, and rather than choosing to accept the proceeds, they might decide to invest the
       sum (ignoring taxes) in an annuity. Their intention is to let this invested sum produce annual distributions to
       supplement Social Security payments. Assume the recipient just received $75,000, again ignoring tax effects.
       They have the chance to invest in an annuity that will provide a distribution at the end of each of the next five
       years, and that annuity contract provides interest at 3% annually. Their first receipt will be one year from now.
       This is an ordinary annuity.
       We can also solve for the payment given the other variables, an important aspect of financial analysis. If the
       person with the $75,000 windfall wants this fund to last five years and they can earn 3%, then how much can
       they withdraw from this fund each year? To solve this question, we can apply the present value of an annuity
       formula. This time, the payment (PYMT) is the unknown, and we know that the PVa, or the present value that
       they have at this moment, is $75,000:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          8.3 · Loan Amortization 239

The person can withdraw this amount every year beginning one year from now, and when the final payment is
withdrawn, the fund will be depleted. Interest accrues each year on the beginning balance, and then
$16,376.60 is withdrawn at the end of each year.

 LINK TO LEARNING
 Another View of Annuities

  Many examples of annuities are available, with presentations as varied as the opinions as to how
  appropriate they are for investors, especially retirees. Math Is Fun (https://openstax.org/r/Math_Is_Fun) is
  particularly interesting and potentially helpful for understanding how to apply this knowledge.

 8.3 Loan Amortization

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Distinguish between different types of loans.
  · Explain how amortization works.
  · Create an amortization schedule.
  · Calculate the cost of borrowing.

Types of Loans

Funds can be loaned to businesses of any type, including corporations, partnerships, limited liability
companies, and proprietorships. Bankers often refer to these lending structures as facilities, and they can be
tailored to the specific needs of the borrower in a number of ways. Similarly, lenders develop loans and lines of
credit for individuals. Whether for a business or an individual, the purpose of the loan, method of repayment,
interest rate, specific terms, and time involved must all be tailored to the goals of the borrower and the lender.
In this chapter, we will focus on fixed-rate loans, although other alternatives exist.
Typical business loans include the following:

  · Term loans generally bear a maturity date and a set rate of interest and are typically used to finance
      investments in assets such as equipment, buildings, and possibly other acquired firms. The length of the
      term loan is generally designed to match the useful life of the asset being financed, and it will usually be
      repaid on a monthly schedule. It's common for a term loan to be backed by collateral, such as the asset
      itself or other assets of the business.

  · Revolving lines of credit (revolvers), are used to finance the short-term working capital needs of a
      business. Revolvers will have a specific maximum but no set schedule of monthly payments. Interest
      accrues on the amount of cash that a company has drawn down from the facility. These credit lines may
      be secured by accounts receivable, inventory, other assets of the business, or sometimes simply the good
240 8 · Time Value of Money II: Equal Multiple Payments

             faith and credit of the company if the firm is strong, creditworthy, and established with the lender.
             Revolvers must often be fully repaid and unused for a short period of time to assure the lender that the
             borrower is not using this facility for longer-term needs.

       Personal loans also come in several types, designed for the purpose the borrower (consumer) has in mind,
       with assistance from the lender in determining the appropriate structure:

         · Personal lines of credit are similar to lines of credit on bank cards, with interest being charged on the
             outstanding balance of the credit line. These are available on the basis of personal credit scores, with data
             being supplied by the three best-known credit reporting firms: Experian, Equifax, and TransUnion.
             Individuals should check their scores with each of these companies at least once per year, which they can
             do for no charge. Additional requests from the same company require a small fee.

         · An unsecured personal loan is an installment loan, initially drawn for a fixed amount and repaid on a
             periodic schedule with interest, as we have seen in our annuity examples. Unsecured means that the loan
             is not secured by collateral but is instead based on the strong credit history of the borrower.

         · In contrast, a secured personal loan has an asset backing up the unpaid amount, and if the consumer
             defaults on the debt, the asset can be seized by the lender to satisfy their claim. A common example is an
             auto loan, which is secured by the car being purchased; nonpayment or default on the loan can lead to the
             borrower's car being repossessed.

         · A mortgage loan is another type of secured personal loan, but for a longer period, such as 20, 25, or even
             30 years. The home being purchased or built is the collateral, and the home may be foreclosed upon if the
             borrower defaults. Full title to the home typically remains with the lender as long as an unpaid balance
             remains on the debt.

         · Student loans are borrowings intended to fund college or career education, and they can come from a
             financial institution or the federal government. Interest rates on these loans are generally low and
             advantageous, and repayment does not begin until after the borrower's education is complete (or if they
             drop below a certain level of time status, such as becoming a half-time student).

      Calculating Loan Payments Using Simple Amortization

       Loan amortization refers to a schedule of how and when a debt will be repaid with interest. As noted, we will
       focus on fixed-rate debts, such as auto loans, personal loans with installment payments, or mortgages. Before
       entering into a borrowing agreement, the borrower can use any of a number of tools to verify the terms being
       offered, such as the monthly payment on a car loan financed by the dealer. In many cases, this is
       accomplished by using the present value of an annuity formula:

       We've already reviewed the present value of ordinary annuities in several examples. Before we look into
       business or consumer loans and their repayment, we must review an area of Time Value of Money I.

       We're not likely to make annual payments on a home mortgage or auto loan, as these are commonly paid on a
       monthly basis. Fortunately, our formulas are easily adjusted from annual to non-annual periods. You will recall
       that we solve for non-annual periods in the same way, with two adjustments: (1) we divide the annual interest
       rate by the number of periods in the year, and (2) we multiply the time periods by the number of those periods
       within a year. Therefore, in the case of monthly debt service, including interest and principal, we use 12
       periods.

       Given a three-year car loan at 6%, rather than using 6% and 3 periods in our formula, we would instead use
       0.5% (6% ÷ 12) and 36 periods (3 years × 12), and then apply the present value of an annuity formula in the
       same way. Let's say the three-year, 6% auto loan is for $32,000. You need to know if you can squeeze the
       monthly payment into your budget. For our examples, we will ignore any other charges, fees, taxes, or extras
       that your lender might include in these payments, and we will focus only on interest and principal repayment.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          8.3 · Loan Amortization 241

You will make the first payment one month from now, making this an ordinary annuity. What is the amount of
your monthly debt service? In this case, you would be solving for a different unknown: the payment amount.
By substitution into the present value of an annuity formula, adjusting for monthly payments as noted:

Dividing both sides by 32.781 to isolate the payment amount (PYMT) gives us

Solving for the payment, we find that it's approximately $973.50 per month. You consult your monthly budget
and find that you can cover this monthly payment, so you conclude the deal. Ask the salesperson for the
amortization table on this debt to show how your 36 payments of $973.50 will cover your interest plus
repayment of the principal amount of the debt. At this point, you know how to complete your own table. Using
a financial calculator or Microsoft Excel simplifies the operation above to a few keystrokes, as presented later
in this chapter.

Two extracts from an amortization table are shown in Table 8.4.

Month Payment Interest Principal Remaining Balance

1   973.50 160.00 813.50                                         31,186.50

2   973.50 155.93 817.57                                         30,368.93

3   973.50 151.84 821.66                                         29,547.27

4   973.50 147.74 825.77                                         28,721.51

5   973.50 143.61 829.89                                         27,891.61

            ...continued...

33  973.50 19.23 954.27                                          2,891.54

34  973.50 14.46 959.04                                          1,932.50

35  973.50  9.66 963.84                                                      968.66

36  973.50  4.84 968.66                                                      0.00

Total 35,046.00 3,046.08 32,000.00

Table 8.4 Extracts from an Amortization Table ($)

This table resembles proofs we have seen of annuities, but let's focus on some details:

1. Each fixed payment contains both interest and principal repayment.
2. Because the payments are fixed and the amount of remaining debt is decreasing, the monthly interest

      portion is always decreasing, and the amount of principal payment therefore must be increasing.

We can conclude that the lender is making more of their revenue (interest) in the early months than in the
later months. In addition, the debt is decreasing slowly in the early months and more rapidly in the later
242 8 · Time Value of Money II: Equal Multiple Payments

       months. We can all agree that lenders are compensated for the risks they take earlier rather than later. Of the
       36 payments of $973.50, $32,000 has been repaid as the principal borrowed. The remaining $3,046.08 is the
       lender's revenue, the cost of credit.
       For an additional example, one that drives home the point that more interest is paid in the early months of a
       long-term loan, we will consider a 20-year home mortgage. Home mortgage payments are typically made
       monthly, and again, we will ignore additional charges by the lender, such as real estate tax and homeowner's
       insurance. Let's assume you buy a $200,000 home, pay $60,000 as a cash deposit, and will finance the
       remaining $140,000 over 20 years. The bank offers you a 3.6% annual interest rate. What will the amount of
       your monthly payment be for the interest and principal repayment? The bank will tell you, of course, but let's
       prove it for ourselves. We'll do it in exactly the same fashion as the car loan above, using the present value of
       an annuity formula. Remember that you are not financing the entire $200,000 purchase; you pay $60,000 in
       cash, so you are only financing the remaining $140,000.
       We modify the periods from years to months by multiplying by 12, and we modify the annual rate to a monthly
       rate by dividing by 12, resulting in

       By substitution into the present value of an annuity formula:

We divide both sides by 170.907667 to isolate the payment amount (PYMT):

Your monthly mortgage payment is $819.16. As in our auto loan example, we'll complete an amortization table
of our own--though, of course, you'll remember to ask your lender for their version. Extracts from a full
240-month table are shown in Table 8.5 below. The front-end packing of interest revenue is more obvious here
because of the longer time period.

Month Payment Interest Principal Remaining Balance

                                                                          140,000.00

                                 1  819.16 420.00 399.16                  139,600.84

                                 2  819.16 418.80 400.36                  139,200.48

                                 3  819.16 417.60 401.56                  138,798.92

                                 4  819.16 416.40 402.76                  138,396.16

                                 5  819.16 415.19 403.97                  137,992.19

                                 6  819.16 413.98 405.18                  137,587.01

                                 7  819.16 412.76 406.40                  137,180.61

Table 8.5 Amortization Table for a Mortgage ($)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                 8.4 · Stated versus Effective Rates 243

Month Payment Interest Principal Remaining Balance

8    819.16 411.54 407.62                        136,772.99

9    819.16 410.32 408.84                        136,364.15

             ...continued....

236  819.16 12.17 806.99                         3,250.84

237  819.16  9.75 809.41                         2,441.44

238  819.16  7.32 811.84                         1,629.60

239  819.16  4.89 814.27                         815.33

240  819.16  2.45 816.71                         (1.38)

Total 196,598.40 56,597.02 140,001.38            (Rounding)

Table 8.5 Amortization Table for a Mortgage ($)

As with your car loan, earlier payments contain more interest than loan repayment, so the lender's revenue is
at a significant peak in the early years. The length of the loan, coupled with the frequent compounding,
emphasizes this. In month 10, the interest and principal amounts "pass" each other, and now the loan balance
is dropping at a quicker rate. Finally, note that you will pay more than $56,000 to finance this $140,000
borrowing. If you pay off this mortgage over 240 months as planned, the interest cost represents an additional
28% of the full cost of the home!

If the borrower has the means to make an accelerated payment against this debt--for example, due to a
bonus or other windfall--doing so can make a significant difference in the total cost of financing over the life
of the loan. Assume that after three years (month 36), you receive a bonus of $2,000 and decide to apply the
entire amount to prepay the remaining balance. Your loan agreement allows you to apply the entire amount to
the remaining unpaid balance of the mortgage. While this might seem equal to just 2.5 months' worth of
payment, the debt is fully paid off almost 6 months ahead of schedule, and total interest is reduced from over
$56,000 to $55,000. The ability to prepay long-term debts such as this is clearly worth negotiating initially.

 8.4 Stated versus Effective Rates

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Explain the difference between stated and effective rates.
  · Calculate the true cost of borrowing.

The Difference between Stated and Effective Rates

If you look at the bottom of your monthly credit card statement, you could see language such as "The interest
rate on unpaid balances is 1.5% per month." You might think to yourself, "So, that's 12 months times 1.5%, or
18% per year." This is a fine example of the difference between stated and effective annual interest rates. The
effective interest rate reflects compounding within a one-year period, an important distinction because we
tend to focus on annual interest rates. Because compounding occurs more than once per year, the true annual
rate is higher than appears. Please remember that if interest is calculated and compounded annually, the
stated and effective interest rates will be the same. Keep in mind that the following principles work whether
you are the debtor paying off an obligation or an investor hoping for more frequent compounding. The
dynamics of the time value of money apply in either direction.

Effective Rates and Period of Compounding

Let's remain with our example of a credit card statement that indicates an interest rate of 1.5% per month on
244 8 · Time Value of Money II: Equal Multiple Payments

unpaid balances. If you use this card only once, to make a $1,000 purchase in January, and then fail to pay the
bill when it comes due, the issuer will bill you $15. Now you owe them $1,015. Assume you completely ignore
this bill and never pay it throughout the rest of the year. The monthly calculation of interest starts to
compound on past interest assessments in addition to the $1,000 initial purchase (see Table 8.6).

                                 Month Interest Balance

                                                         1,000.00

                                 1                       15.00 1,015.00

                                 2                       15.23 1,030.23

                                 3                       15.45 1,045.69

                                 4                       15.69 1,061.36

                                 5                       15.92 1.077.28

                                 6                       16.16 1,093.44

                                 7                       16.40 1,109.84

                                 8                       16.65 1,126.49

                                 9                       16.90 1,143.39

                                 10                      17.15 1,160.54

                                 11                      17.41 1,177.95

                                 12                      17.67 1,195.62

                                 Table 8.6 Compounded
                                 Interest on a Credit Card
                                 Statement ($)

Because interest compounds monthly rather than annually, the effective annual rate is 19.56%, not the
intuitive rate of the stated 1.5% times 12 months, or 18%. Our basic compounding formula of (1+i)^n by
substitution shows:

To isolate the effective annual rate, we then deduct 1 because our interest calculations are based on the value
of $1:

Therefore, it falls to the consumer/borrower to understand the true cost of borrowing, especially when larger
dollar amounts are involved. If we had been dealing with $10,000 rather than $1,000, the annual difference
would be more than $156.

 LINK TO LEARNING

 A Helpful Demonstration . . .

  From the Corporate Finance Institute (https://openstax.org/r/Corporate_Finance_Institute) comes a fine
  visual of a similar example. Here, we see the effective annual rate that results from taking a nominal annual
  rate of 12%, with a benefit to an investor if they have the benefit of monthly compounding.

One example of the importance of understanding effective interest rates is an invention from the early 1990s:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                          8.4 · Stated versus Effective Rates 245

the payday advance loan (PAL). The practice of offering such loans can be controversial because it can lead to
very high rates of interest, perhaps even illegally high, in an act known as usury. Although some states have
outlawed PALs and others place limits on them, some do not. A PAL is a short-term loan in anticipation of a
person's next paycheck. A person in need of money for short-term needs will write a check on Thursday but
date the check next Thursday, which is their normal payday; assume this transaction is for $200. The lender,
typically operating from a storefront, will advance the $200 cash and hold the postdated check. The lender
charges a fee--let's say $14--as their compensation. The following Thursday, the borrower is expected to pay
off the advance, and if they do not, the lender can deposit the postdated check. If that check has insufficient
funds, more fees and penalties will likely be assessed.
One primary reason that arrangements such as these are controversial is the excessively high nominal (stated)
interest rate that they can represent. For a one-week loan of $200, the borrower is paying $14, or 7% of the
borrowed amount. If this is annualized, with 52 seven-day periods in a year, the stated rate is 364%! While a
PAL might seem to be an effective immediate solution to a cash shortfall, the mathematics behind the true
cost of borrowing simply do not make sense, and a person who uses such arrangements regularly is placing
themselves at a dreadful financial disadvantage.

 THINK IT THROUGH

 How Tempting Is That Refund Anticipation?

  Refund anticipation loans (RALs) began in 1987, and they are still available (though not from banks) and
  used by millions of people.1 Now, RALs come from private lending chains. These loans allow you to
  determine your April 15 personal income tax liability through a preparer and receive an advance against
  your expected refund.2 But beware: your ability to analyze the true cost of money is always critical. Like all
  loans, RALs bear a rate of interest. Let's assume that the firm that prepared your tax return determines that
  you're entitled to an $800 refund. Once they advance that amount to you, it will bear interest at a certain
  rate; we'll assume 0.5% per week. You might expect a tax refund in four weeks. Half a percent of $800
  doesn't sound like much, but what happens when you annualize it into an effective rate, assuming your tax
  refund arrives exactly four weeks from when you accept the loan? Assume no compounding during those
  four weeks.
  Solution:
  A weekly rate of 0.5% on the $800 advance is $4 per week, so for four full weeks, you've paid $16 for the use
  of $800. Of course, that totals 2% of the amount advanced. There are 13 four-week periods in a year, so
  even though the interest rate appears to be small, it amounts to 26% when annualized! We assumed no
  compounding to keep the illustration simple, but we further assume that you are not using this advance
  throughout the year. If you were, then periodic compounding would drive the effective rate even higher, to
  just over 29.3%.

1 Michelle Singletary. "Another Reason Not to Opt for a Tax Refund Loan: It May Delay Your Next Stimulus Payment." Washington
Post, February 16, 2021. https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2021/02/16/tax-refund-loan-problems/
2 Amelia Josephson. "What Is a Refund Anticipation Loan?" SmartAsset. March 18, 2021. https://smartasset.com/taxes/what-is-a-
refund-anticipation-loan
246 8 · Time Value of Money II: Equal Multiple Payments

8.5 Equal Payments with a Financial Calculator and Excel

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Use a financial calculator and Excel to solve perpetuity problems.
  · Use a financial calculator and Excel to solve annuity problems.
  · Calculate an effective rate of interest.
  · Schedule the amortization of a loan repayment.

Solving Time Value of Money Problems Using a Financial Calculator

Since the 1980s, many convenient and inexpensive tools have become available to simplify business and
personal calculations, including personal computers with financial applications and handheld/desktop or
online calculators with many of the functions we've studied already. This section will explore examples of both,
beginning with financial calculators. While understanding and mastery of the use of time value of money
equations are part of a solid foundation in the study of business and personal finance, calculators are rapid
and efficient.

We'll begin with the constant perpetuity that we used to illustrate the constant perpetuity formula. A share of
preferred stock of Shaw Inc., pays an annual $2.00 dividend, and the required rate of return that investors in
this stock expect is 7%. The simple technique to solve this problem using the calculator is shown in Table 8.7.

      Step                       Description                 Enter         Display

      1 Set all variables to defaults 2ND [RESET] ENTER RST 0.00

      2 Enter formula                                    2 ÷ 7 % =         28.57

      Table 8.7 Calculator Steps to Find the Required Rate of Return3

Earlier we solved for the present value of a 5-year ordinary annuity of $25,000 earning 8% annually. We then
solved for an annuity due, all other facts remaining the same. The two solutions were $99,817.50 and
$107,802.50, respectively. We enter our variables as shown in Table 8.8 to solve for an ordinary annuity:

Step                             Description                        Enter         Display

1 Set all variables to defaults                          2ND [RESET] ENTER RST             0.00

2 Enter number of payments                               5N                N =             5.00

3 Enter interest rate per payment period 8 I/Y                             I/Y =           8.00

4 Enter payment amount                                   25000 +/- PMT     PMT = -25,000.00

5 Compute present value                                  CPT PV            PV = 99,817.75

Table 8.8 Calculator Steps to Solve for an Ordinary Annuity

Note that the default setting on the financial calculator is END to indicate that payment is made at the end of a
period, as in our ordinary annuity. In addition, we follow the payment amount of $25,000 with the +/-
keystroke--an optional step to see the final present value result as a positive value.

To perform the same calculation as an annuity due, we can perform the same procedures as above, but with
two additional steps after Step 1 to change the default from payments at the end of each period to payments
at the beginning of each period (see Table 8.9).

3 The specific financial calculator in these examples is the Texas Instruments BA II PlusTM Professional model, but you can use other
financial calculators for these types of calculations.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                        8.5 · Equal Payments with a Financial Calculator and Excel 247

Step  Description                                               Enter                  Display

1 Set all variables to defaults                         2ND [RESET] ENTER RST                         0.00

2 Change default to payment at end of period 2ND [BGN] 2ND [SET] BGN                                  0.00

3 Return to calculator mode                             2ND [QUIT]                                    0.00

4 Enter number of payments                              5N                   N =                      5.00

5 Enter interest rate per payment period                8 I/Y                I/Y =                    8.00

6 Enter payment amount                                  25000 +/- PMT        PMT = -25,000.00

7 Compute present value                                 CPT PV               PV = 107,803.17

Table 8.9 Calculator Steps to Solve for an Annuity Due

The procedures to find future values of both ordinary annuities and annuities due are comparable to the two
procedures above. We begin with the ordinary annuity, with reminders that this is the default for the financial
calculator and that entering the payment as a negative number produces a positive result (see Table 8.10).

Step  Description                                              Enter              Display

      1 Set all variables to defaults                   2ND [RESET] ENTER RST                   0.00

      2 Enter number of payments                        5N                   N =                5.00

      3 Enter interest rate per payment period 4 I/Y                         I/Y =              4.00

      4 Enter payment amount                            3000 +/- PMT         PMT = -3,000.00

      5 Compute future value                            CPT FV               FV = 16,248.97

Table 8.10 Calculator Steps to Find the Future Value of an Ordinary Annuity

Solving for an annuity due with the same details requires the keystrokes listed in Table 8.11.

Step  Description                                               Enter                  Display

1 Set all variables to defaults                         2ND [RESET] ENTER RST                   0.00

2 Change default to payment at end of period 2ND [BGN] 2ND [SET] BGN                            0.00

3 Return to calculator mode                             2ND [QUIT]                              0.00

4 Enter number of payments                              5N                        N =           5.00

5 Enter interest rate per payment period                4 I/Y                     I/Y =         4.00

6 Enter payment amount                                  3000 +/- PMT              PMT = -3,000.00

7 Compute future value                                  CPT FV                    FV = 16,898.93

Table 8.11 Calculator Steps to Find the Future Value of an Annuity Due

Earlier in the chapter, we explored the effect of interannual compounding on the true cost of money, recalling
the basic compounding formula:

We saw that when modified for monthly compounding at a stated rate of 1.5%, the actual (effective) rate of
interest per year was 19.56%. One simple way to prove this is by using the calculator keystrokes listed in Table
248 8 · Time Value of Money II: Equal Multiple Payments

8.12.

             Step                Description                              Enter         Display

                1 Set all variables to defaults          2ND [RESET] ENTER RST                0.00

                2 Set the display to four decimal places 2ND [FORMAT] 4 ENTER DEC = 4.0000

                3 Return to calculator mode              2ND [QUIT]                           0.0000

                4 Enter (1 + the monthly interest rate) 1.015 YX                              1.0150

                5 Enter the number of months             12 YX                                1.1956

             Table 8.12 Calculator Steps to Prove the Actual Rate of Interest per Year

Had we assumed that the stated monthly interest rate of 1.5% could be simply multiplied by 12 months for an
annual rate of 18%, we would be ignoring the effect of more frequent compounding. As indicated above, the
annual interest on the money that we spent initially, accumulating at a rate of 1.5% per month, is 19.56%, not
18%:

The final example in this chapter will represent the amortization of a loan. Using a 36-month auto loan for
$32,000 at 6% per year compounded monthly, we can easily find the monthly payment and the amortization of
this loan on our calculator using the following procedures and keystrokes.

First, we find the monthly payment (see Table 8.13).

       Step                      Description                                     Enter             Display

       1 Set all variables to defaults                                    2ND [RESET] ENTER RST              0.00

       2 Set payments per year to 12                                      2ND [P/Y] 12 ENTER P/Y =           12.00

       3 Return to calculator mode                                        2ND [QUIT]                         0.00

       4 Enter number of payments with the payment multiplier 3 2ND [xP/Y] N                  N =            36.00

       5 Enter annual interest rate                                       6 I/Y               I/Y =          6.00

       6 Enter loan amount                                                32000 PV            PV = 32,000.00

       7 Compute the monthly payment                                      CPT PMT             PMT = -973.50

       Table 8.13 Calculator Steps to Find the Monthly Payment of a Loan

We've verified the amount of our monthly debt service, including both the interest and repayment of the
principal, as $973.50. The next step with our calculator is to verify our amortization at any point (see Table
8.14).

             Step                Description                                Enter             Display

             1 Set previous work as an amortization worksheet 2ND [AMORT] P1 =                         1.00

             2 Set beginning period to 1                                  1 ENTER       P1 =           1.00

             3 Set ending period to 12                                     12 ENTER P2 =             12.00

             4 Display amortization data at the end of month 12                         BAL = 21,965.02

             5                                                                          PRN = -10,034.98

             Table 8.14 Calculator Steps to Verify Amortization at the End of One Year

Access for free at openstax.org
                                       8.5 · Equal Payments with a Financial Calculator and Excel 249

Step  Description                           Enter                                 Display
  6                                                                         INT = -1,647.02

Table 8.14 Calculator Steps to Verify Amortization at the End of One Year

Without resetting the calculator, we will try a second example, this time reviewing the second full year of
amortization at the end of 24 months (see Table 8.15).

Step  Description                                    Enter                  Display

1 Set previous work as an amortization worksheet 2ND [AMORT] P1 =                    1.00

2 Change beginning period to month 13  13 ENTER P1 =                        13.00

3 Change ending period to month 24      24 ENTER P2 =                       24.00

4 Display amortization data at the end of month 24                          BAL = 11,311.13

5                                                                           PRN = -10,653.89

6                                                                           INT = -1,028.11

Table 8.15 Calculator Steps to Verify Amortization at the End of Two Years

Solving Time Value of Money Problems Using Excel

Microsoft's popular spreadsheet program Excel is arguably one of the most common and powerful numeric
and data analysis products available. Yet while mastery of Excel requires extensive study and practice, enough
basics can be learned in two or three hours to provide the user with the ability to solve problems quickly and
conveniently, including extensive financial capability. Most of the calculations in this chapter were prepared
with Excel.

The boxes in the Excel gridwork, known individually as cells (located at the intersection of a column and a row),
can contain numbers, text, and very powerful formulas (or functions) for calculations and data analytics. Cells,
rows, columns, and groups of cells (ranges) are easily moved, formatted, and replicated. In the mortgage
amortization table for 240 months seen in Section 8.3.2, only the formulas for month 1 were typed in. With one
simple command, that row of formulas was replicated 239 more times, with each line updating itself with
relevant number adjustments automatically. With some practice, a long table such as that can be constructed
by even a relatively new user in less than 10 minutes.

In this section, we will illustrate how to use Excel to solve problems from earlier in the chapter, including
perpetuities, ordinary annuities, effective interest rates, and loan amortization. We will omit the basic
dynamics of an Excel spreadsheet because they were presented sufficiently in preceding chapters.

Revisiting the constant perpetuity from Section 8.1, in which our shares of Shaw Inc., preferred stock pay an
annual fixed dividend of $2.00 and the required rate of return is 7%, we do not use an Excel function for this
simple operation. The two values are entered in cells B3 and B4, respectively.

We enter a formula in cell B6 to perform the division and display the result in that cell. The actual contents of
cell B6 are typed below it for your reference, in cell B8 (see Figure 8.2).
250 8 · Time Value of Money II: Equal Multiple Payments

                                                               Figure 8.2 Excel Spreadsheet for Valuing a Perpetuity

                Download the spreadsheet file (https://openstax.org/r/spreadsheet_file_Chapter08_finance) containing
                key Chapter 8 Excel exhibits.
       To find the present value of an ordinary annuity, we revisit Section 8.2.1. You will draw $25,000 at the end of
       each year for five years from a fund earning 8% annually, and you want to know how much you need in that
       fund today to accomplish this. We accomplish this in Excel easily with the PV function. The format of the PV
       command is

                                                           =PV(rate,periods,payment,0,0)
       Only the first three arguments inside the parentheses are used. We'll place them in cells and refer to those
       cells in our PV function. As an option, you could also type the numbers into the parentheses directly. Notice
       the slight rounding error because of decimal expansion. Also, the payment must be entered as a negative
       number for your result to be positive; this can be accomplished either by making the $25,000 in cell B5 a
       negative amount or by placing a minus sign in front of the B5 in the formula's arguments. In cell B3, you must
       enter the percent either as 0.08 or as 8% (with the percent sign). We repeated the formula syntax and the
       actual formula inputs in column A near the result, for your reference (see Figure 8.3).

                                           Figure 8.3 Excel Spreadsheet Showing the Present Value of an Ordinary Annuity

       We also found the present value of an annuity due. We use the same information from the ordinary annuity
       problem above, but you will recall that the first of five payments happens immediately at the start of year 1,
       not at the end. We follow the same procedures and inputs as in the previous example, but with one change to
       the PV function: the last argument in the parentheses will change from 0 to 1. This is a toggle switch that
       commands the PV function to treat this as an annuity due instead of an ordinary annuity (see Figure 8.4).

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     8.5 · Equal Payments with a Financial Calculator and Excel 251

                                     Figure 8.4 Excel Spreadsheet Showing the Present Value of an Annuity Due

Section 8.2 introduced us to future values. Comparable to the PV function above, Excel provides the FV
function. Using the same information--$3,000 invested annually for five years, starting one year from now, at
4%--we'll solve using Excel (see Figure 8.5). The format of the command is

                                                    =FV(rate,periods,payment,0,0)

                                  Figure 8.5 Excel Spreadsheet Showing the Future Value of an Ordinary Annuity

As with present values, using the same data but solving for an annuity due requires the fifth argument inside
the parentheses to be changed from 0 to 1; all other values remain the same (see Figure 8.6).

                                      Figure 8.6 Excel Spreadsheet Showing the Future Value of an Annuity Due

In Section 8.4, we explained the difference between stated and effective rates of interest to show the true cost
of borrowing, in this case for a one-year period, if interest is compounded for periods within a year. The syntax
for the Excel effect function to calculate this rate is

                                                           =EFFECT(rate,periods)
252 8 · Time Value of Money II: Equal Multiple Payments

       where rate is the nominal rate and periods represents the number of periods within a year.
       Earlier, our example showed that 1.5% compounded monthly results in not 18% per year but actually over
       19.56% (see Figure 8.7).

                                                Figure 8.7 Excel Spreadsheet Showing Effective Interest Rate

Note several things: First, the nominal interest rate is entered as a percent. Second, the actual effect function
in C7 is typed as =EFFECT(rate,B7); we use the word rate because we actually assigned a name to cell B3, so
Excel can use it in a function and replicate it without it changing. When cell C7 is replicated to C8 and C9, rate
remains the same, but the formulas automatically adjust to use B8 and B9 for the periods.

To assign a name to a cell, keep in mind that every cell has column-row coordinates. We want cell B3 to be the
anchor of our effective rate calculations. Rather than referring to cell B3, we can name it, and in this case, we
use the name rate, which we can then use in formulas like any other Excel cell letter-number reference. Place
the cursor in cell B3. Now, look at cell A1 on the grid: right above that cell, you see a box displaying B3, the
current cursor location. If you click in that box and type "rate" (without the quotation marks), as we did, then
hit the enter key, the value in that box will change to rate. Now, if you type "rate" (again, without quotation
marks) into a formula, Excel knows to use the contents of cell B3.

Excel provides convenient tools for figuring out amortization. We'll revisit our 36-month auto loan for $32,000
at 6% per year, compounded monthly. A loan amortization table for a fixed interest rate debt is usually
formatted as follows, with the Interest and Principal columns interchangeable:

Period                           Payment  Interest  Principal  Balance

In Excel, a table is completed by using the function PMT. The individual steps follow.

1. List the information about the loan in the upper left of the worksheet, and create the column headings for
      the schedule of amortization. Type "B5" (without the quotation marks) in cell E9 to begin the schedule.
      Then enter 1 for the first month under the Payment # (or Month) column, in cell A10 (see Figure 8.8).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    8.5 · Equal Payments with a Financial Calculator and Excel 253

                                                          Figure 8.8 Step 1 of Creating an Amortization Table

2. Next, in cell B10, the payment is derived from the formula =PMT(rate,periods,pv), with PV representing the
     present value, or the loan amount. Because we are compounding monthly, enter C$2 and C$3 for the rate
     and periods, respectively. Cell B5 is used for the loan amount, but notice the optional minus sign placed in
     front of the entry B$5; this causes the results in the schedule to be displayed as positive numbers. The
     dollar sign ($) inserted in the cell references forces Excel to "freeze" those locations so that they don't
     attempt to update when we replicate them later; this is known in spreadsheet programs as an absolute
     reference (see Figure 8.9).

                                                          Figure 8.9 Step 2 of Creating an Amortization Table

3. The next step is to calculate the interest. We take the remaining balance from the previous line, in this
     case cell E9, and multiply it by the monthly interest rate in cell C2, typing C$2 to lock in the reference. The
     remaining balance of the loan should always be multiplied by this monthly percentage (see Figure 8.10).
254 8 · Time Value of Money II: Equal Multiple Payments

                                                                   Figure 8.10 Step 3 of Creating an Amortization Table

        4. Because this is a fixed-rate loan, whatever is left from each payment after first deducting the interest
             represents principal, the amount by which the balance of the outstanding loan balance is reduced.
             Therefore, the contents of cell D10 represent B10, the total payment, minus C10, the interest portion (see
             Figure 8.11). No dollar signs are included because this cell reference can adjust to each row into which this
             formula is replicated, as will be seen in the following examples.

                                                                   Figure 8.11 Step 4 of Creating an Amortization Table

        5. Because our principal portion of the last payment has reduced our outstanding balance, it is subtracted
             from the preceding balance in cell E9 (see Figure 8.12). The command therefore is =E9-D10.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     8.5 · Equal Payments with a Financial Calculator and Excel 255

                                                          Figure 8.12 Step 5 of Creating an Amortization Table

Now that the first full row is defined, an amortization schedule is easily developed by Excel's replication
abilities. Place the cursor on cell A10, hold down the left mouse button, and drag the cursor to cell E10. Cells
A10 through E10 in row 10 should now be highlighted. Release the mouse button. Then "grab" the tiny square
symbol at the bottom right of cell E10 and drag it downward as far as you need; in this case, you'll need 35
more rows because this is a 36-month loan, so it will end at row 45. We added a line for totals.
This is now a complete loan amortization schedule (see Figure 8.13). The first several periods display, followed
by the last few periods, to prove that the schedule is complete (data rows for month 4 to month 22 are
hidden).

                                                           Figure 8.13 Completed Amortization Schedule

This will look familiar; it's the same amortization table used as a proof in Section 8.3 (see Table 8.4). There is no
rounding error because Excel uses the full decimal expansion in its calculations.
256 8 · Time Value of Money II: Equal Multiple Payments

       This chapter has explored the time value of money by expanding on the concepts discussed in Time Value of
       Money I with additional funds being periodically added to or subtracted from our investment, either
       compounding or discounting them according to the situation. In all cases, the payments in the stream were
       identical. If they had not been identical, a separate set of operators would be required, and these will be
       addressed in the next chapter.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                 8 · Summary 257

     Summary

8.1 Perpetuities

A perpetuity is an investment that is intended to provide an expected return indefinitely, either remaining
constant or growing by an incremental amount. Preferred stock is a common example with a preestablished
dividend formula. An indefinite stream of payments cannot be compounded into a future value, but it can be
discounted to a present value, providing an opportunity to determine the amount an investor should be
willing to pay for a share of that stock.

8.2 Annuities

An annuity is a stream of fixed periodic payments that is expected to be paid or received. Calculations of future
value or present value are commonly performed on these payment streams for a wide number of reasons in
business and personal financial analysis, as seen in the chapter focusing on single amounts, particularly in
loan repayment. Annuities may be ordinary annuities, in which the first cash flow of a series occurs at the end
of the first period, or annuities due, if the first cash flow occurs at the beginning point of the first period.

8.3 Loan Amortization

Loans are contracts between a lender and a borrower. Failure to observe the rules of that contract, such as
payment of interest or repayment of the amount owed, can subject the borrower to substantial penalties as
well as damage to their credit. Loan agreements bearing a fixed rate of interest have a scheduled
amortization, or rate and time of repayments with interest. Several types of business and personal loans were
described.

8.4 Stated versus Effective Rates

For a borrower to understand the true cost of financing, they must be familiar with interannual compounding,
which can cause a stated interest rate that appears to be annual to actually be higher. The effective rate of
interest was demonstrated to understand that true cost.

8.5 Equal Payments with a Financial Calculator and Excel

The use of two tools for managing and understanding the time value of money and its many applications was
discussed: a professional financial calculator and the popular Microsoft Office Suite spreadsheet application
Excel.

     Key Terms

annuity a stream of regular, periodic payments to be received or paid
annuity due a stream of periodic payments in which the payment or receipt occurs at the beginning of each

    period
constant perpetuity a stream of periodic payments that is expected to continue indefinitely with no change

    in the amount paid or received
discount rate an interest rate used in time value of money calculations to determine present value; may

    derive from several sources, such as stated contract rates, costs to borrow, or expected rates of return on
    investments
effective interest rate the interest rate that results when compounding occurs multiple times within a year;
    the true cost of borrowing
growing perpetuity a stream of periodic payments that is expected to continue indefinitely with growth of
    the amount paid or received in the future, usually by a fixed percentage
loan amortization the scheduling of periodic repayment of a debt, typically involving regular payments or
    receipts of amounts that include both interest payment and repayment of the principal of the amount owed
lump sum a single cash payment made in lieu of a series of future payments, such as a lottery payout or a
258 8 · CFA Institute

    legal settlement
ordinary annuity a stream of periodic payments in which the payment or receipt occurs at the end of each

    period
perpetuity a stream of periodic payments that is expected to continue indefinitely
preferred stock shares of ownership in a corporation that typically entitle the holder to a fixed dividend per

    share, if declared by the corporation, with priority over holders of that corporation's common stock
required rate of return the minimum amount of return that an investor will accept on an investment given

    the level of risk involved
retirement planning the process of determining one's objectives for retirement, including one's finances,

    and developing strategies and tactics to achieve them
structured settlements monetary legal settlements that are paid out in installments, such as an annuity,

    rather than a lump sum cash amount

     CFA Institute

This chapter supports some of the Learning Outcome Statements (LOS) in this CFA® Level I Study Session
(https://openstax.org/r/CFA_Level_I_Study_Session2). Reference with permission of CFA Institute.

     Multiple Choice

 1. The best example of a constant perpetuity would most likely be ________.
      a. an annuity due
      b. dividends from common stock
       c. preferred stock
      d. an ordinary annuity

 2. You wish to endow a university chair of accounting for a salary of $100,000 per year to the recipient. The
     university will withdraw $100,000 each year for the recipient's salary. The amount of your gift will remain
     untouched indefinitely, in perpetuity. The university can lock in a fixed rate for your investment of 2.8% per
     year. In order to achieve this, what is the approximate amount of the gift you would have to make now?
      a. $3,103,569
      b. $3,571,429
       c. $4,101,218
      d. $4,227,827

 3. Preferred stock in Blue Agate Inc. is issued for dividends of $3.00 per share. The dividends will increase
     each year at 0.178%, a growing perpetuity. The required rate of return on a stock such as this is 2.5%. At
     what approximate price will this preferred stock most likely sell today?
      a. $117.21
      b. $119.87
       c. $120.00
      d. $129.20

 4. Julio's attorney negotiates a structured settlement after an injury, consisting of seven equal payments to
     Barry of $150,000 each. The first payment is due today, and the remaining payments will be received in
     annual amounts, with the second payment occurring one year from now. What is the approximate value of
     this settlement in today's dollars if Barry uses a discount rate of 5%?
      a. $911,352
      b. $867,960
       c. $746,235

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                        8 · Multiple Choice 259

      d. $1,050,000

 5. What is the approximate present value of an ordinary annuity (beginning one year from now) of a stream
     of 12 annual payments of $87,000 if you use a discount rate of 6%?
      a. $773,154.04
      b. $747,278.92
       c. $729,394.95
      d. $718,974.58

 6. If Maria invests $2,700 at the end of each six-month period for six years at an annual rate of 4%, what is
     the approximate future value of her ordinary annuity? Review Chapter 7 for the techniques of interannual
     compounding.
      a. $17,909.10
      b. $20,248.23
       c. $31,755.54
      d. $36,212.67

 7. Assume all of the same facts as in exercise 6 above, except that Maria begins immediately and makes each
     of her payments at the beginning of each 6-month period instead of the end. What is the approximate
     future value of her annuity due at the end of the six years?
      a. $17,909.10
      b. $36,936.92
       c. $32,707.24
      d. $22,997.88

 8. Rather than spending her $48,000 in casino winnings, Christy places the money in an investment that will
     earn her 5% per year, compounded annually. She will withdraw the money in four equal annual
     installments beginning one year from today. What must the approximate amount of each annual
     withdrawal be for this investment to be fully depleted in four years?
      a. $11,136.38
      b. $12,892.56
       c. $12,243.47
      d. $13,536.61

 9. Your friend Jamal borrows $5,000 from you, agreeing to pay you back with 8% annual interest, with the
     first payment due to you one year from today. You ask that you be fully repaid over the next four years.
     However, to lower his annual payment, Jamal asks you to extend the period over five full years instead.
     What will be the approximate difference in his total payments to you, including interest and principal, if
     the debt is amortized over five years rather than four?
      a. Jamal will pay $544 less.
      b. Jamal will pay $544 more.
       c. Jamal will pay $223 less.
      d. Jamal will pay $223 more.

10. Your new El Supremo credit card arrangement indicates that you will owe interest on unpaid balances at a
      nominal (stated) rate of 1.2% per month. If the interest rate is compounded monthly, what is the
      approximate effective annual rate of interest?
       a. 15.39%
      b. 12.00%
       c. 14.02%
260 8 · Problems

      d. 14.40%

     Problems

Use four decimal places on time value of money factors unless otherwise specified. Approximations and minor
differences because of rounding are acceptable. Ignore the effect of taxes. Assume that all percentages are
annual rates and that compounding occurs annually unless indicated otherwise.

 1. Steve purchases preferred stock in Berklee Corporation, with each share paying a $2.50 dividend. This
     dividend will remain constant. If the public's required rate of return for Berklee stock is 8%, at what price
     should this company's stock sell?

 2. Donna enters into an investment contract that will guarantee her 4% per year if she deposits $3,500 each
     year for the next 10 years. She must make the first deposit one year from today, the day she signs the
     agreement. How much will she have when she makes her last payment 10 years from now?

 3. Assume the same facts as in problem 2 above, except that Donna negotiates the chance to make her first
     payment now and continue to pay at the beginning of each year for the 10-year period. How much will she
     have accumulated?

 4. Bill will receive a royalty payment of $18,000 per year for the next 25 years, beginning one year from now,
     as a result of a book he has written. If a discount rate of 10 percent is applied, should he be willing to sell
     out his future rights now for $160,000? How about $162,500? $165,000?

 5. Debbie won the $60 million lottery. She is to receive $1 million a year for the next 50 years beginning one
     year from now, plus an additional lump sum payment of $10 million after 50 years. The discount rate is 10
     percent. How much cash would she need to be offered today to tempt her to take a lump-sum cash offer
     instead, all things equal?

 6. Kim started a paper route on January 1, 2016. Every three months, she deposited $300 in her new bank
     account, which earned 4 percent annually but was compounded quarterly. On December 31, 2019, she
     placed the entire balance in her bank account in an investment that earned 5 percent annually. How much
     will she have on December 31, 2022?

 7. You hire Thomas to work for you for five years, and you agree to put away enough money as a lump sum
     now to fund an annuity for him. At the end of those five years, he will retire and may begin drawing out
     $20,000 per year for five years, starting on the last day of each year (in this case, the end of year 6, from
     when this arrangement began, through year 10). How much must you invest today if your guaranteed
     interest rate is 3% compounded annually for all 10 years?

 8. Your new boss doesn't have a pension or 401(k) plan for your retirement, but she agrees to place aside
     $12,000 every year once a year for four years. She gives you the option of either starting immediately on
     your first day of work or starting one year from now. That makes this the difference between an ordinary
     annuity and an annuity due. If the plan earns 5% per year, compounded annually, what will be the
     difference between the two approaches after the four years / four payments?

 9. Jada is borrowing $40,000 from you today. She agrees to pay you back in annual installments beginning a
     year from now over eight years, with interest at 3%. What would her annual payment amount be, including
     both interest and principal?

10. You agree to finance your new SUV with an auto loan of $38,000. This loan will be repaid over three years
      with monthly payments (and compounding) at a 4% annual interest rate (0.33% per month). What will
      your monthly loan payment be?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          8 · Video Activity 261

     Video Activity

Future Value of Ordinary Annuities
Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/Future_Value_of_an_Annuity)
 1. What is the primary difference between this demonstration and our chapter examples, keeping the

     chapter "Time Value of Money I" in mind?
 2. Explain the significance of Dr. van Biezen's comment at 4:32 regarding a difference when payments are

     made at the beginning of each pay period rather than the end.
Practical Example of Annuities
Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/What_is_an_annuity?)
 3. What is the primary difference between a fixed annuity and a variable annuity?
 4. Annuities are often recommended to retirees and seniors. Why would a fixed annuity be more attractive to

     such a person than a variable annuity?
262 8 · Video Activity
Access for free at openstax.org
9 · Why It Matters                                                                                                                   263

 9
              Time Value of Money III: Unequal Multiple Payment Values

Figure 9.1 Capital investment in production equipment such as this robotic arm requires extensive analysis of the benefits the
investment is likely to produce over time. (credit: modification of "Webb Telescope Crew Flexes Robotic Arm at NASA" by Chris Gunn/
NASA/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline

  9.1 Timing of Cash Flows
  9.2 Unequal Payments Using a Financial Calculator or Microsoft Excel

      Why It Matters

Baseball legend Ted Williams once said, "Baseball is the only field of endeavor where a man can succeed three
times out of ten and be considered a good performer."1 On routine or unimportant decisions, business
managers might aspire to do as well as Ted Williams, making the right decisions only 30% of the time. But a
professional decision maker must "hit it out of the park" when making major capital investment choices and
recommendations.

As a student in a course of business studies and career development, it is highly likely that you will be a
decision maker about projects that are likely to generate future cash flows but will also require a large initial
expense. When you ask your manager to invest $500,000 or more in a new piece of equipment that could help
your department meet or exceed its goals, you must be prepared to defend your request. Competing
managers and departments will be asking for similar funding, and there simply might not be enough for
everyone. This decision process requires financial analysis.

Mark Cuban of Shark Tank fame enjoys citing the series' catchphrase: "Know thy numbers." As a business
professional, you must be able to assess potential profit against expenditures to be successful. In most cases,
this is based on our understanding of cash flow. A major capital investment might seem initially like a gamble,
but it is a gamble that can be hedged in your favor with understanding, analysis, and knowledge of your
numbers.

The purpose of this chapter is to give you information and instruction on how this is done. The techniques we
will discuss in this chapter will clarify decisions that must be made in the process of investing in a business. We

1 Pete Palmer and Gary Gillette, eds. The 2006 ESPN Baseball Encyclopedia. New York: Sterling Publishing, 2006, 5.
264 9 · Time Value of Money III: Unequal Multiple Payment Values

focus first on decisions we make about our own money as investors if uneven cash receipts or payments are
involved.

 9.1 Timing of Cash Flows

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Describe how multiple payments of unequal value are present in everyday situations.
  · Calculate the future value of a series of multiple payments of unequal value.
  · Calculate the present value of a series of multiple payments of unequal value.

Multiple Payments or Receipts of Unequal Value: The Mixed Stream

At this point, you are familiar with the time value of money of single amounts and annuities and how they
must be managed and controlled for business as well as personal purposes. If a stream of payments occurs in
which the amount of the payments changes at any point, the techniques for solving for annuities must be
modified. Shortcuts that we have seen in earlier chapters cannot be taken. Fortunately, with tools such as
financial or online calculators and Microsoft Excel, the method can be quite simple.

The ability to analyze and understand cash flow is essential. From a personal point of view, assume that you
have an opportunity to invest $2,000 every year, beginning next year, to save for a down payment on the
purchase of your first home seven years from now. In the third year, you also inherit $10,000 and put it all
toward this goal. In the fifth year, you receive a large bonus of $3,000 and also dedicate this to your ongoing
investment.

The stream of regular payments has been interrupted--which is, of course, good news for you. However, it
does add a new complexity to the math involved in finding values related to time, whether compounding into
the future or discounting to the present value. Analysts refer to such a series of payments as a mixed stream.
If you make the first payment on the first day of next year and continue to do so on the first day of each
following year, and if your investment will always be earning 7% interest, how much cash will you have
accumulated--principal plus earned interest--at the end of the seven years?

This is a future value question, but because the stream of payments is mixed, we cannot use annuity formulas
or approaches and the shortcuts they provide. As noted in previous chapters, when solving a problem
involving the time value of money, a timeline and/or table is helpful. The cash flows described above are
shown in Table 9.1 . Remember that all money is assumed to be deposited in your investment at the beginning
of each year. The cumulative cash flows do not yet consider interest.

           Year                  0  1  2                          3  4  5  6  7

Cash Invested                    $0.00 $2,000 $2,000 $2,000 $12,000 $2,000 $5,000 $2,000

Cumulative Cash Flows               $2,000 $4,000 $6,000 $18,000 $20,000 $25,000 $27,000

Table 9.1

By the end of seven years, you have invested $27,000 of your own money before we consider interest:

  · Seven years times $2,000 each year, or $14,000
  · The extra $10,000 you received in year 3 (which is invested at the start of year 4)
  · The extra $3,000 you received in year 5 (which is invested at the start of year 6)

These funds were invested at different times, and time and interest rate will work for you on all accumulated
balances as you proceed. Therefore, focus on the line in your table with the cumulative cash flows. How much
cash will you have accumulated at the end of this investment program if you're earning 7% compounded

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        9.1 · Timing of Cash Flows 265

annually? You could use the future value of a single amount equation, but not for an annuity. Because the
amount invested changes, you must calculate the future value of each amount invested and add them
together for your result.

Recall that the formula for finding the future value of a single amount is                    , where FV is the

future value we are trying to determine, PV is the value invested at the start of each period, i is the interest

rate, and n is the number of periods remaining for compounding to take effect.

Let us repeat the table with your cash flows above. Table 9.2 includes a line to show for how many periods
(years, in this case) each investment will compound at 7%.

                      Year         0  1       2         3  4                5        6        7

           Cash Invested          $0.00 $2,000 $2,000 $2,000 $12,000 $2,000 $5,000 $2,000

           Cumulative Cash Flows      $2,000 $4,000 $6,000 $18,000 $20,000 $25,000 $27,000

           Years to Compound          7       6         5  4                3        2        1

           Table 9.2

The $2,000 that you deposit at the start of year 1 will earn 7% interest for the entire seven years. When you

make your second investment at the start of year 2, you will now have spent $4,000. However, the interest

from your first $2,000 investment will have earned you                      , so you will begin year 2 with

$4,140 rather than $4,000.

Before we complicate the problem with a schedule that ties everything together, let's focus on years 1 and 2
with the original formula for the future value of a single amount. What will your year 1 investment be worth at
the end of seven years?

You need to address the year 2 investment separately at this point because you've calculated the year 1
investment and its compounding on its own. Now you need to know what your year 2 investment will be worth
in the future, but it will only compound for six years. What will it be worth?

You can perform the same operation on each of the remaining five invested amounts, remembering that you
invest $12,000 at the start of year 4 and $5,000 at the start of year 6, as per the table. Here are the five
remaining calculations:

Notice how the exponent representing n decreases each year to reflect the decreasing number of years that
each invested amount will compound until the end of your seven-year stream. For clarity, let us insert each of
these amounts in a row of Table 9.3 :

                  Year        0        1       2            3                 4         5        6        7
Cash Invested               $0.00     $2,000  $2,000       $2,000           $12,000   $2,000   $5,000   $2,000
Cumulative Cash Flows                 $2,000  $4,000       $6,000           $18,000  $20,000  $25,000  $27,000

Table 9.3
266 9 · Time Value of Money III: Unequal Multiple Payment Values

                   Year         0  1     2                        3     4     5     6                          7
Years to Compound
Compounded Value at End of         7     6                        5     4     3     2                          1
Year 7
                                   $3,211.56 $3,001.46 $2,805.10 $15,729.55 $2,450.09 $5,724.50 $2,140.00
Table 9.3

The solution to the original question--the value of your seven different investments at the end of the seven-
year period--is the total of each individual investment compounded over the remaining years. Adding the
compounded values in the bottom row provides the answer: $35,062.26. This includes the $27,000 that you
invested plus $8,062.26 in interest earned by compounding.

It's important to note that throughout these sections on the time value of money and compounded or
discounted values of mixed streams and their analysis, we are placing the valuation at the end or beginning of
a period for simplicity in the examples. In reality, businesses might consider valuations happening within the
period to allow for a degree of regularity in the revenue streams provided by the asset being considered.
However, because this is a technique of forecasting, which is inherently uncertain, we will continue with
analysis by period.

THINK IT THROUGH

Future Value of a Mixed Stream

Assume that you can invest five annual payments of $10,000, beginning immediately, but you believe you
will be able to invest additional amounts of $5,000 at the beginning of years 4 and 5. This investment is
expected to earn 4% each year. What is the anticipated future value of this investment after the full five
years?

Solution:

               Year                   0  1                           2     3     4     5

Cash Invested                      $0.00 $10,000 $10,000 $10,000 $15,000 $15,000

Cumulative Cash Flows                    $10,000 $20,000 $30,000 $45,000 $60,000

Years to Compound                        5                           4     3     2     1

Compounded Value at End of Year 5        $12,166.53 $11,698.59 $11,248.64 $16,224.00 $15,600.00

Table 9.4

The equations to calculate each individual year's compounded value at the end of the five years are as
follows:

  The sum of these individual calculations is $66,937.76, which is the total value of this stream of invested
  amounts plus compounded interest.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                      9.1 · Timing of Cash Flows 267

Let's take the example above and review it from a different angle. Keeping in mind that we have not yet
explored the use of Excel, is there another way to view our solution? The problem above takes each annual
investment and compounds it into the future, then adds the results of each calculation to find the total future
value of the stream of payments.
But when you break the problem down, another way to look at the problem is as a five-year annuity of $10,000
per year plus added payments in years 4 and 5. Can we solve for the future value of an annuity first and then
perform two separate calculations on the additional amounts ($5,000 each in years 4 and 5)? Yes, we can.
Let's summarize:

  · Future value of a $10,000 annuity due, 4%, 5 years, plus
  · Future value of a single payment of $5,000, 4%, 2 years, plus
  · Future value of a single payment of $5,000, 4%, 1 year
This must give us the same result. The formula for the future value of an annuity due is

This problem can be solved in the three steps of the summary above.
Step 1:

Step 2:

Step 3:

Combining the results from each of the three steps gives us

It works. Whether you view this problem as five separate periods that can be compounded separately and
then combined or as a combination of one or more annuities and/or single payment problems, we always
arrive at the same solution if we are diligent about the time, the interest, and the stream of payments.
The Present Value of a Mixed Stream
Now that we've seen the calculation of a future value, consider a present value. We will begin with a
personal example. You win a cash windfall through your state's lottery. You would like to take a portion of the
funds and place them in a fixed investment so that you can draw $17,000 per year starting one year from now
and continue to do so for the next two years. At the end of year 4, you want to withdraw $17,500, and at the
end of year 5, you will withdraw the last $18,000 to close the account. When you take your last payment of
$18,000, your fund will be totally depleted. You will always be earning 6% annually. How much of your cash
windfall should you set aside today to accomplish this?
Let us break down the problem, remembering that we are thinking in reverse from the earlier problems that
involved future values. In this case, we're bringing future values back in time to find their present values. You
will recall that this process is called discounting rather than compounding.
Regardless of how we solve this, the question remains the same: How much money must we invest today
(present value) to achieve this? And remember that we will always be earning 6% compounded annually on
any invested balances.
268 9 · Time Value of Money III: Unequal Multiple Payment Values

       We are calculating present values as we did in previous chapters, given a known future value "target," in order
       to determine how much money you need today to achieve that goal. Let us break this down by first reviewing
       the relevant equations from previous chapters.
       Present value of an ordinary annuity:

Present value of a single amount:

where PVa is the present value of an annuity, PYMT is one payment in a consistent stream (an annuity), i is the
interest rate (annual unless otherwise specified), n is the number of periods, PV is the present value of a single
amount, and FV is the future value of a single amount.

You want to find out how much money you need to set aside today to accomplish your goal. You can also find
out how much money you need to set aside in each period to accomplish this goal. Therefore, we can address
this problem in increments. Let us look at potential solutions.

First, we will break this down into the cash flows of each year. Table 9.5 shows the timing of the future cash
flows you're expecting:

           Year                    0  1  2  3  4  5

Expected Amount to Be Withdrawn at End of Year $0.00 $17,000 $17,000 $17,000 $17,500 $18,000

Table 9.5

One method is to take each year's cash flows, which happen at the end of the year, and discount them to
today using the present value formula for a single amount:

Because year 1's withdrawal from your fund only has one year to earn interest, we discounted it for one year.
The second amount is discounted for two years:

The next three years are discounted in the same way, for three, four, and five years, respectively:

Notice how we reverse our thinking on the exponent n from our approach to future value. This time, it
increases each period because we discount each future amount for a longer period to arrive at the value in
today's dollars.
When we add all five discounted present value amounts from above, we derive today's value of $72,753.49.
Expressed more simply, if you wanted to extract the specified stream of cash flows at the end of each year

Access for free at openstax.org
                                         9.1 · Timing of Cash Flows 269

($17,000 for three years, then $17,500, then $18,000), you would have to begin with $72,753.49. The thing to
remember is that any amounts remaining in this fund, regardless of how you deplete it, will always be earning
6% annually. See Table 9.6.

           Year           0  1  2  3  4                                           5

Withdrawn at End of Year     $17,000.00 $17,000.00 $17,000.00 $17,500.00 $18,000.00

Interest on Balance          $4,365.21 $3,607.12 $2,803.55 $1,951.76 $1,018.87

Remaining Balance         $72,753.49 $60,118.70 $46,725.82 $32,529.37 $16,981.13  $0.00

Table 9.6

Let us try another approach. Because the amount of cash withdrawn in the first three years remains constant
at $17,000, it can be viewed as an annuity--specifically, a three-period annuity of $17,000 and two single
payments of $17,500 and $18,000. Therefore, we could also discount (bring to present value) an annuity of
$17,000 for three years (the first three) and then combine it with the year 4 discounted amount and the year 5
discounted amount. We can try it using the formulas for PVa and PVused above. In Step 1, we will discount the
first three years as an annuity (ordinary, as the first withdrawal is not made until one year from now); in Step 2,
we will discount the year 4 single payment amount; and in Step 3, we will do the same for the year 5 single
payment amount. Then we can add them together.

Step 1: Find the present value of the annuity using the PVa formula:

Step 2: Discount the year 4 amount using the formula for the present value of a single amount:

Step 3: Perform the same operation as in Step 2 for the year 5 amount:

Now that all three amounts have been discounted to today's value, we can add them:

Calculating the present value of cash flows is very common and critical in the analysis of capital investments
in business for two compelling reasons: first, the investment is likely quite significant, and second, the risk will
usually encompass a longer time frame. When the author of this chapter would purchase a large machine, it
would likely take several years for that machine to justify its purchase with the revenues it would generate.
This is one of the primary reasons that accountants require us to depreciate the cost of an asset over time: to
assess the cost against the time it will take for that asset to produce profits and cash flow.
270 9 · Time Value of Money III: Unequal Multiple Payment Values

THINK IT THROUGH

Present Value of a Mixed Stream

Assume that you decide to invest $450,000. All cash flows are discounted at 4%. You are told by your
financial advisor to expect cash inflows from your investment of $100,000 in year 1, $125,000 in year 2,
$175,000 in year 3, $90,000 in year 4, and $50,000 in year 5. Would you agree to this plan based only on the
numbers? Each amount will be withdrawn at the end of every year, and interest will be compounded
annually.

Solution:

                  Year                                            0  1  2  3  4  5

Expected Amount to Be Withdrawn at End of Year $0.00 $100,000 $125,000 $175,000 $90,000 $50,000

Table 9.7

Applying the formula for the present value of a single amount, we discount each amount and then add the
discounted amounts. We will simplify this approach with Excel shortly, but we must understand the
reasoning behind discounting uneven cash flow streams with a direct solution.

  By combining the five discounted amounts above, we get a total present value of $485,326.48. This amount
  represents the value today of the five expected cash inflows for as long as our remaining balance is earning
  4%.

 CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
 Thoughts on Cash Flow from Irina Simmons

  In 2013, the author interviewed Irina Simmons, senior vice president, chief risk officer, and former treasurer
  of EMC Corporation. The importance and understanding of cash flow analysis is fundamental to this text,
  and several of her insights are highly relevant to our content and procedures here.
  AA: Ms. Simmons, why is cash management so important to an existing or start-up firm, and how does it
  compare to the more basic and traditional focus on profitability?
  Simmons: While profitability is very useful for analysis by investors to measure performance, an
  organization's cash flow provides superior measurement. Cash flow is easy to understand, provides a
  transparent way of assessing a firm's health, and is not subject to any qualifications. By focusing upon cash
  flow, any firm--whether it is mature or a start-up organization--can have a clear picture of its health and
  success.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   9.2 · Unequal Payments Using a Financial Calculator or Microsoft Excel 271

  AA: In your bio, you mention liquidity management. Can you elaborate on this and why liquidity
  management is so important to a firm?
  Simmons: Just as effective forecasting can provide superior cash management, the same holds true for
  liquidity management. For example, if you are able to confidently predict levels and timing of cash, then
  based on that forecast, you can make effective short- and long-term borrowing decisions. A disciplined
  approach to projecting one's cash position means that instead of investing cash in the money market to
  maximize day-to-day liquidity, you can look into longer-term investments that can provide a significantly
  higher return. This is essential to the effective matching of cash inflows and outflows for the firm.
  AA: In summary, do you have any words of advice to students who might have an eye to entrepreneurial
  ventures?
  Simmons: "Cash is king," don't forget that. Understand how cash moves through a business. It is also very
  important to implement and retain a cash management discipline. Never put that off until later. Many
  times, start-ups will say, "Well, I have all this venture money, and we can start making things happen and
  worry about being good cash managers later." But what I've seen is that the longer companies wait, the
  harder it is to break bad habits. Making cash management a priority now will serve entrepreneurs in perfect
  stead as their business starts to gain traction.
  We closed this excellent interview with agreement that we were "kindred spirits" regarding the importance
  of cash flow analysis, including capital decisions such as those mentioned in this chapter. We confirmed
  with each other the core belief that "cash flow is the axis upon which the world of business spins."
  (source: Business Finance: A Clear View, 3rd edition, by Alan S. Adams. LAD Publishing, 2015.)

 LINK TO LEARNING

 Analyst Training Materials

  These materials, developed to help professionals prepare for an analyst certification exam, describe the
  sources of return from investing in a bond (https://openstax.org/r/return-investing-bond).

 9.2 Unequal Payments Using a Financial Calculator or Microsoft Excel

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Calculate unequal payments using a financial calculator.
  · Calculate unequal payments using Microsoft Excel.

Using a Financial Calculator

A financial calculator provides utilities to simplify the analysis of uneven mixed cash streams (see Table 9.8).
Earlier, we explored the future value of a seven-year mixed stream, with $2,000 being saved each year, plus an
additional $10,000 in year 4 and an additional $3,000 in year 6. All cash flows and balances earn 7% per year
compounded annually, and the payments are made at the start of each year. We proved that this result totals
approximately $35,062.26. We begin by clearing all memory functions and then entering each cash flow as
follows:
272 9 · Time Value of Money III: Unequal Multiple Payment Values

Step          Description                                              Enter                 Display

1 Clear cash flow memory                                          CF 2ND [CLR WORK] CF0        0.00

2 Enter 0 for cash flow at Time 0                                 ENTER             CF0        0.00

3 Move to next entry                                                                C01        0.00

4 Enter first cash flow                                           2000 ENTER        C01 = 2000.00

5 Move to next entry                                                                C02        0.00

6 Enter second cash flow                                          2000 ENTER        C02 = 2000.00

7 Move to next entry                                                                C03        0.00

8 Enter third cash flow                                           2000 ENTER        C03 = 2000.00

9 Move to next entry                                                                C04        0.00

10 Enter fourth cash flow                                         12000 ENTER       C04 = 12000.00

11 Move to next entry                                                               C05        0.00

12 Enter fifth cash flow                                          2000 ENTER        C05 = 2000.00

13 Move to next entry                                                               C06        0.00

14 Enter sixth cash flow                                          5000 ENTER        C06 = 5000.00

15 Move to next entry                                                               C07        0.00

16 Enter seventh cash flow                                        2000 ENTER        C07 = 2000.00

17 Press NPV                                                      NPV               I          0.00

18 Enter interest rate                                            7 ENTER           I =        7.00

19 Press down arrow to show current NPV rate                                        NPV        0.00

20 Press CPT to find net present value                            CPT               NPV 20,406.56

Table 9.8 Steps for Calculating Uneven Mixed Cash Flows2

At this point, we have found the net present value of this uneven stream of payments. You will recall, however,
that we are not trying to calculate present values; we are looking for future values. The TI BA II PlusTM
Professional calculator does not have a similar function for future value. This means that either we can find the
future value for each payment in the stream and combine them, or we can take the net present value we just
calculated and easily project it forward using the following keystrokes. Note the net present value solution in
Step 20 above. We will use that and then use the simpler of the two approaches to calculate future value (see
Table 9.9).

      Step                Description                                  Enter        Display

      21 Enter NPV from Step 20                                      20406.56 PV = 20,406.56

      22 Enter number of compounding periods 8 N                               N =       8.00

      23 Enter interest rate                                         7 I/Y I/Y =         7.00

      24 Calculate future value                                      CPT FV FV = -35,062.27

      Table 9.9 Steps for Calculating Uneven Mixed Cash Flows, Continued

2 The specific financial calculator in these examples is the Texas Instruments BA II PlusTM Professional model, but you can use other
financial calculators for these types of calculations.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                   9.2 · Unequal Payments Using a Financial Calculator or Microsoft Excel 273

This is consistent with the solution we found earlier, with a difference of one cent due to rounding error.

We may also use the calculator to solve for the present value of a mixed cash stream. Earlier in this chapter, we
asked how much money you would need today to fund the following five annual withdrawals, with each
withdrawal made at the end of the year, beginning one year from now, and all remaining money earning 6%
compounded annually:

              Year 1               2    3       4       5

                          $17,000 $17,000 $17,000 $17,500 $18,000

              Table 9.10

We determined these withdrawals to have a total present value of $72,753.30. Here is an approach to a
solution using a financial calculator. In this example, we will store all cash flows in the calculator and perform
an operation on them as a whole (see Table 9.11). Because we will use the NPV function (to be explored in
more detail in a later chapter), we enter our starting point as 0 because we do not withdraw any cash until one
year after we begin.

Step          Description                          Enter                        Display

1 Clear cash flow memory                   CF 2ND [CLR WORK] CF0                         0.00

2 Enter 0 for cash flow at Time 0          ENTER                           CF0           0.00

3 Move to next entry                                                       C01           0.00

4 Enter first cash flow                    17000 ENTER                     C01 = 17000.00

5 Move to next entry                                                       C02           0.00

6 Enter second cash flow                   17000 ENTER                     C02 = 17000.00

7 Move to next entry                                                       C03           0.00

8 Enter third cash flow                    17000 ENTER                     C03 = 17000.00

9 Move to next entry                                                       C04           0.00

10 Enter fourth cash flow                  17500 ENTER                     C04 = 17500.00

11 Move to next entry                                                      C05           0.00

12 Enter fifth cash flow                   18000 ENTER                     C05 = 18000.00

13 Press NPV                               NPV                             I             0.00

14 Enter interest rate                     6 ENTER                         I =           6

15 Press down arrow to show current NPV rate                               NPV           0.00

16 Press CPT to find net present value     CPT                             NPV = 72,753.49

Table 9.11 Steps for Calculating the Present Value of a Mixed Cash Stream

This result, you will remember, was calculated earlier in the chapter by the formula approach.

Using Microsoft Excel

Several of the exhibits already in this chapter have been prepared with Microsoft Excel. While full mastery of
Excel requires extensive study and practice, enough basics can be learned in two or three hours to provide the
user with the ability to quickly and conveniently solve problems, including extensive financial applications.
Potential employers and internship hosts have come to expect basic Excel knowledge, something to which you
274 9 · Time Value of Money III: Unequal Multiple Payment Values

are exposed in college.

We will demonstrate the same two problems using Excel rather than a calculator:

1. The future value of a mixed cash stream for a seven-year investment
2. The present value of a mixed cash stream of five withdrawals that you wish to make from a fund to be

     established today

Beginning with the future value problem, we created a simple matrix to lay out the mixed stream of future
cash flows, starting on the first day of each year, with all funds earning 7% throughout. Our goal is to
determine how much money you will have saved at the end of this seven-year period.

Table 9.12 repeats the data from earlier in the chaper for your convenience.

            Year                 0  1  2                          3  4        5  6  7

Cash Invested                    $0.00 $2,000 $2,000 $2,000 $12,000 $2,000 $5,000 $2,000

Cumulative Cash Flows               $2,000 $4,000 $6,000 $18,000 $20,000 $25,000 $27,000

Years to Compound                   7  6                          5  4        3  2  1

Table 9.12

Figure 9.2 is an Excel matrix that parallels Table 9.12 above.

                                                                Figure 9.2 Compound Interest Example

        Download the spreadsheet file (https://openstax.org/r/chapter9-excel-exhibits) containing key Chapter
        9 Excel exhibits.

We begin by entering the cash flow as shown in Figure 9.2. The assumed interest rate is 7%. The interest on
the balance is calculated as the amount invested at the start of the year multiplied by the assumed interest
rate. The cumulative cash flows of each year are calculated as follows: for year 1, the amount invested plus the
interest on the balance; for years 2 through 7, the amount invested plus the interest on the balance plus the
previous year's running balance. By adding up the amount invested and the interest on the balance, you
should arrive at a total of $35,062.27.

We can use Excel formulas to solve time value of money problems. For example, if we wanted to find the
present value of the amount invested at 7% over the seven-year time period, we could use the NPV function in
Excel. The dialog box for this function (Rate, Value 1, Value2) is shown in Figure 9.3.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   9.2 · Unequal Payments Using a Financial Calculator or Microsoft Excel 275

                                                        Figure 9.3 Dialog Box for NPV Function, Problem 1

The function argument Rate is the interest rate; Value1, Value2, and so on are the cash flows; and "Formula
result" is the answer.
We can apply the NPV function to our problem as shown in Figure 9.4.

                                                         Figure 9.4 Applying the NPV Function, Problem 1

Please note that the Rate cell value (C1) and the Value1 cell range (C3:I3) will vary depending on how you set
up your spreadsheet.
The non-Excel version of the problem, using an assumed interest rate of 7%, produces the same result.
276 9 · Time Value of Money III: Unequal Multiple Payment Values

            Year  1           2                                      3     4     5     6  7

Amount Invested at Start $2,000 $2,000 $2,000 $12,000 $2,000 $5,000 $2,000

            NPV   $20,406.56

Table 9.13

We conclude with the second problem addressed earlier in this chapter: finding the present value of an
uneven stream of payments. We can use Excel's NPV function to solve this problem as well (see Figure 9.5).

            Year                                                  0     1     2     3     4  5

Expected Amount to Be Withdrawn at End of Year $0.00 $17,000 $17,000 $17,000 $17,500 $18,000

Table 9.14

                                                        Figure 9.5 Dialog Box for NPV Function, Problem 2

Again, Rate is the interest rate; Value1, Value 2, and so on are the cash flows; and "Formula result" is the
answer.
Let us apply the NPV function to our problem, as shown in Figure 9.6 and Figure 9.7.

                                                Figure 9.6 Applying the NPV Function, Problem 2: Excel Data

Access for free at openstax.org
                     9.2 · Unequal Payments Using a Financial Calculator or Microsoft Excel 277

                                         Figure 9.7 Applying the NPV Function, Problem 2: Function Argument

Please note that the Rate cell value (B3) and the Value1 cell range (C2:G2) will vary depending on how you set
up your spreadsheet.

The non-Excel version of the problem produces the same result: an NPV of $72,753.49.

     Year      0     1  2  3  4                                                       5

Desired Withdrawals $17,000 $17,000 $17,000 $17,500 $18,000
Each Year

Interest Rate  0.06

NPV                                                          $72,753.49

Table 9.15
278 9 · Summary

     Summary

9.1 Timing of Cash Flows

To understand the true value and strength of cash, it is necessary to consider its timing. This is relevant for
investments for the future and for analyses of the value of projects that require investment today to produce
expected flows of cash later. These future cash flows could involve inflows or outflows of cash in unequal
amounts. This section analyzed the determination of present and future value of these uneven or mixed cash
flows.

9.2 Unequal Payments Using a Financial Calculator or Microsoft Excel

This section discussed the use of two tools for managing and understanding the time value of money and its
many applications when the flows of cash are unequal: the TI BA II PlusTM Professional financial calculator and
the spreadsheet application Excel.

     Key Terms

capital investment a major expenditure that requires a large up-front investment and is expected to
    generate substantial cash inflow in return

cash flow the amount of cash actually flowing into and out of a business, as opposed to income (which is
    based on accounting rules, accruals, and reports)

future value the value of an asset or holding at a point in the future based on expectations of that asset's
    growth at a certain rate of return

mixed stream a set of cash flows over a period of time that can vary in amount from one period to the next
present value the value of an asset in today's dollars based on future growth expectations at an assumed

    interest rate

     CFA Institute

This chapter supports some of the Learning Outcome Statements (LOS) in this CFA® Level I Study Session
(https://openstax.org/r/cfa-level1-study-session). Reference with permission of CFA Institute.

     Multiple Choice

General instructions: Approximations and minor differences because of rounding are acceptable. Ignore the
effect of taxes. Please assume that all percentages are annual rates and compounding occurs annually unless
otherwise indicated.

 1. For which of the following situations would you NOT be able to use the one-step shortcut provided by an
     annuity calculation?
      a. Planning an amortization table for a three-year car loan at 2%
      b. Investing $2,000 per year for 10 years at 5%
       c. Calculating the monthly payment on a 20-year home mortgage of $150,000 at 3%
      d. Finding the present value of a fund that will pay $1,000 the first year, $2,000 in the second year, and
           $3,500 in the third year

 2. If you invest $3,000 today, $5,000 one year from now, and $3,000 two years from now, approximately how
     much money will you have at the end of the third year if you invest in a fund paying 7%?
      a. $11,770.24
      b. $12,609.63
       c. $13,187.79
      d. $14,274.50

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                   9 · Review Questions 279

3. You intend to invest four annual payments, starting immediately: $10,000 now, another $10,000 at the end
    of year 1, $12,000 at the end of year 2, and $15,000 at the end of year 3. How much will you have at the end
    of year 4 if the fund is always earning 6% compounded annually?
     a. $53,918.13
     b. $54,417.52
     c. $57,685.30
     d. $57,894.77

4. You can invest a windfall of $40,000 today at 4% compounded annually. You don't believe you can make
    another investment one year from now, but you believe that you can save enough that two years from
    now, you can deposit another $10,000 in the same investment, which will still be earning 4% compounded
    annually. How much will you have accumulated in this investment three years from now?
     a. $50,400.00
     b. $54,875.32
     c. $55,394.56
     d. $57,123.33

5. Donna can invest today in a fund that will guarantee her a 5% return compounded annually for five years.
    She can invest $1,200 today, $1,400 one year from now, $1,800 two years from now, and $2,100 three years
    from now. If she can make these investments as scheduled, how much will she have accumulated five
    years from now?
     a. $6,878.97
     b. $7,632.23
     c. $8,142.52
     d. $8,799.49

6. Jane wants to create a fund today that will provide her a 4% guaranteed compounded annual rate. She
    wants to withdraw $15,000 one year from now and $27,000 two years from now, after which the fund will
    be depleted. How much must she invest today to achieve this goal?
     a. $42,400.00
     b. $41,912.43
     c. $40,775.89
     d. $39,386.10

7. You wish to draw from a fund you're creating today with a 3% guaranteed compounded annual rate. You
    hope to withdraw $40,000 one year from now, $35,000 two years from now, and $25,000 three years from
    now, at which point the fund will be depleted. How much must you invest today to achieve this?
     a. $94,704.35
     b. $95,346.98
     c. $95,255.12
     d. $95,945.78

    Review Questions

1. Refer to Question 3 above. Solve using the financial calculator, documenting your steps/keystrokes.

2. Refer to Question 7 above. Solve using the financial calculator, documenting your steps/keystrokes.

3. You agree to repay a loan over five years with the following stream of cash payments: $1,000; $1,100;
    $1,250; $1,280; and $1,300. If you wish to discount these payments to their present value today using 4%,
    why can you not use one annuity calculation, as seen in previous chapters?
280 9 · Problems

     Problems

 1. Your aunt promises to gift you $1,500 now, $1,700 one year from now, $1,900 two years from now, and
     $2,500 three years from now. You will deposit all four amounts in an account that bears 3% interest
     compounded annually. How much will be in the account at the end of the fourth year?

 2. You believe that you can set aside $1,200 each year for the next four years, starting immediately, in order
     to buy a small fishing boat for your retirement. Your friend Luis promises that he'll pay you back $4,900
     that he owes you three years from now, so you will add that to the payment you make at the start of year
     4. Then, at the start of year 5, you will increase your payment to $1,400; in year 6, to $1,500; and in year 7,
     to $1,600. Every payment will be deposited in a fund bearing 4% interest compounded annually. How
     much will you have set aside for your boat at the end of the seventh year?

 3. Assume you win a lottery that will pay you $10,000 immediately, plus $20,000 one year from now, $30,000
     two years from now, $40,000 three years from now, and $75,000 four years from now. You're curious
     about how much the lottery commission might offer you as an immediate lump sum instead. What is the
     minimum amount you should consider accepting today instead? Use a 5% annual discount rate. Please
     remember that we are ignoring taxation and other considerations and basing this only on the math itself.

 4. Assume you win a lottery, and you are offered the following stream of payments by the lottery
     commission: $25,000 today, $32,000 one year from now, another $32,000 two years from now, and a final
     payment of $55,000 three years from now. You accept the offer. If you invest all of these proceeds at 6%
     compounded annually and extract nothing from the investment, how much will you have at the end of the
     fourth year?

 5. You are offered a business partnership that guarantees you cash returns of $150,000 one year from now,
     nothing at the end of year 2, and $350,000 at the end of year 3. After year 3, the partnership will be
     dissolved, and there will be no more expected returns on your investment. If you analyze this plan
     expecting 7% compounded annually, what is this potential deal worth to you today?

 6. Tony owns a small business that he is attempting to sell. A potential buyer offers him $500,000 today, plus
     $1,500,000 two years from now and a balance of $1,700,000 three years from now. Tony always analyzes
     cash flows using a rate of 4% compounded annually. To compare this to other offers, which would be paid
     in cash immediately, he wants to know the present value of these future cash flows. Show the calculation
     and solution that you would present to Tony to use in his decision.

 7. Continuing Problem 6 above, assume that as Tony receives each payment from the buyer, he can
     immediately invest it in a fund that returns a guaranteed 3.5% compounded annually. If he accepts the
     terms of this offer, how much will he have accumulated in this investment four years from now?

 8. You hire Susan for a three-year term. She has no retirement plan, so you agree to invest money
     immediately to allow her a stream of three payments beginning one year after her employment term
     ends. Draw a timeline! The money you invest for the full six years of this arrangement (three years of
     employment and three years of withdrawals) always earns 4% compounded annually. When Susan
     receives her third and last payment, the fund will be depleted and equal zero. The three payments she will
     receive are as follows:
     End of year 4: $25,000
     End of year 5: $30,000
     End of year 6: $37,000

     Therefore, your goal is to have enough money in this account at the end of Susan's three-year
     employment term to assure her of receiving these payments.

     How much money must you invest today to accomplish this strategy?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          9 · Video Activity 281

 9. Abby owns a business that projects two years of strong cash flow, followed by a two-year hiatus while she
     pursues a graduate degree. She then plans to resume her business and is confident about the following
     two years of cash flow. At the end of each year, she will invest her profits in a fund that returns 3%
     compounded annually. Each investment will be made at the end of the year. Her expected investments are
     as follows:

     Year 1: $50,000
     Year 2: $78,000
     Year 3: 0
     Year 4: 0
     Year 5: $84,000
     Year 6: $89,000

     If Abby meets her expectations, how much money will she have in this fund at the end of year 7?

     Video Activity

Calculate the Present Value for Multiple Cash Flows

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/calculate-the-present-value)
 1. Provide a practical example from your own personal financial management of why an understanding of

     the present value of future cash flows would be important.

 2. You expect to receive $10,800 one year from now, $17,400 two years from now, nothing at the end of the
     third year, and $24,000 four years from now. If you discount all of your cash flows at 7%, then with annual
     compounding, what are these future cash amounts worth to you in total today?

Future Value of Uneven Cash Flows

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/uneven-cash-flows)
 3. Using Excel, determine the future value of this series of expected unequal receipts five years from now if

     each payment is received at the end of each year, beginning one year from now, and the interest rate is
     6% compounded annually.

     End of year 1: $3,800
     End of year 2: $4,400
     End of year 3: $5,100
     End of year 4: $5,800

 4. When using Excel's built-in Future Value function, why does Dr. Konners enter dollar amounts as negative
     numbers?
282 9 · Video Activity
Access for free at openstax.org
10 · Why It Matters                                                                                                                      283

10
              Bonds and Bond Valuation

Figure 10.1 Bonds are very useful investments to add to a portfolio. (credit: modification of "US Treasury Checks - 3D Illustration" by
DonkeyHotey/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline

  10.1 Characteristics of Bonds
  10.2 Bond Valuation
  10.3 Using the Yield Curve
  10.4 Risks of Interest Rates and Default
  10.5 Using Spreadsheets to Solve Bond Problems

      Why It Matters

When an investor purchases a bond, that person is, for all intents and purposes, making a loan to the bond
issuer. Bonds issues are used to raise funds and can be issued by corporations, governments, or even
subagencies of governments (including local municipalities).

As with any type of loan, the borrowing party is expected to offer something to the lender in exchange for
their time and trouble. In this case, the bond-issuing entity will agree not only to repay the original face value
of the loan on a specific date (the maturity of the bond) but also to pay the lender interest--or, in bond
terminology, coupon payments.

Coupon payments are designed to make a bond purchase more acceptable for investors by helping
compensate them for the time value of money. Because investors are parting with money that they have right
now in order to make the initial bond purchase but will not see repayment of principal until the maturity date
of the bond, they will experience the negative impact of time value over the bond term. When a bond issuer
offers periodic coupon payments, this helps offset the negative effect of the delayed receipt of the principal
amount for the investor. Also, because coupon payments will be coming to the investor throughout the term
of the bond, essentially in installment payments (an annuity), the time value of money plays a critical role in
bond transactions and in calculating bond valuation.

Bonds, along with stocks and mutual funds, are considered to be one of the most basic financial instruments
available to any investor. It is quite common for investors to round out their portfolios by purchasing bonds,
284 10 · Bonds and Bond Valuation

       adding a degree of safety and diversity to their investment mix.

      10.1 Characteristics of Bonds

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · List and define the basic characteristics of bonds.
         · List and describe the various types of bonds available.
         · Explain how a bond price is inversely related to its return (yield).

      Bonds as Investments

       One way to look at bond investments is to consider the fact that any investor who purchases a bond is
       essentially buying a future cash flow stream that the bond issuer (or borrower) promises to make as per
       agreement.

       Because bonds provide a set amount of cash inflow to their owners, they are often called fixed-income
       securities. Thus, future cash flows from the bond are clearly stated per agreement and fixed when the bond
       sale is completed.

       Bonds are a basic form of investment that typically include a straightforward financial agreement between
       issuer and purchaser. Nevertheless, the terminology surrounding bonds is unique and rather extensive. Much
       of the specialized vocabulary surrounding bonds is designed to convey the concept that a bond is similar to
       other financial instruments in that it is an investment that can be bought and sold. Much of this unique
       terminology will be covered later in this chapter, but we can set out some of the basics here with an example.

       Let's say that you buy a $1,000 bond that was issued by Apple Inc. at 5% interest, paid annually, for 20 years.
       Here, you are the lender, and Apple Inc. is the borrower.

       LINK TO LEARNING

       Informational Basics on Bonds

         This video (https://openstax.org/r/the-basics-of-bonds) from MoneyWeek editor Tim Bennett provides
         information about the basics of bonds--what they are, how they work, why companies and governments
         issue them, and why investors might buy them.

      Basic Terminology

       We need to know the following basic bond terms and pricing in order to apply the necessary time value of
       money equation to value this Apple, Inc. bond issue:

         · Par value: A bond will always clearly state its par value, also called face amount or face value. This is equal
             to the principal amount that the issuer will repay at the end of the bond term or maturity date. In our
             example, the par value of the bond is $1,000.

         · Coupon rate: This is the interest rate that is used to calculate periodic interest, or coupon payments, on
             the bond. It is important to note that coupon rates are always expressed in annual terms, even if coupon
             payments are scheduled for different periods of time. The most common periods for coupon payments
             other than annual are semiannual and quarterly. Coupon rates will typically remain unchanged for the
             entire life of the bond. In our example, the coupon rate is the 5% interest rate.

         · Coupon payment: This refers to the regular interest payment on the bond. The coupon or periodic
             interest payment is determined by multiplying the par value of the bond by the coupon rate. It is
             important to note that no adjustment needs to be made to the coupon rate if the bond pays interest

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 10.1 · Characteristics of Bonds 285

   annually. However, if a bond pays interest on a semiannual or quarterly basis, the coupon rate will have to
   be divided by 2 or 4, respectively, to convert the stated annual rate to the correct periodic rate. In our
   example, coupons are paid annually, so the periodic or annual interest that is paid is equal to

                                 . You may notice that because these payments are the same amount and made at
   regular intervals, they constitute an annuity stream (refer to Time Value of Money II: Equal Multiple
   Payments.
· Maturity date: The maturity date is the expiration date of the bond, or the point in time when the term of
   a bond comes to an end. On the maturity date, the issuer will make the final interest or coupon payment
   on the bond and will also pay off its principal, or face value. In our example, the maturity date is at the end
   of the 20-year period.
· Yield to maturity (YTM): The YTM is essentially the discount rate used to bring the future cash flows of a
   bond into present value terms. It also equals the return that the investor will receive if the bond is held to
   maturity. The YTM helps quantify the overall investment value of a bond. We will explore how to compute
   this rate later in the chapter.

Table 10.1 displays a selected listing of bonds available for purchase or sale. First, let's review the columns so
you can learn how to read this table.

               Issuer    Bond Type Current Callable? Coupon Maturity Yield% Rating
                                         Price %          Rate % Date

3M Co.                   Corp 105.120 Yes                 2.25 9/19/2026 1.240 A+

Alteryx                  Corp            98.818 No        1.00 8/1/2026 1.206 None

Anheuser-Busch Cos. LLC  Corp 125.319 Yes                 5.95 1/25/2033 3.340 BBB+

City of Chicago          Muni 103.164 Yes                 5.00 1/1/2033 1.030 BBB+

Coca-Cola Co.            Corp            95.206 Yes       1.00 3/15/2028 1.731 A+

DuPont De Nemours Inc.   Corp 100.815 Yes                 2.17 5/1/2023 1.775 BBB+

Exxon Mobil Corp.        Corp 107.325 Yes                 3.18 3/15/2024 0.483 AA-

Ford Motor Co.           Corp 114.880 No                  7.13 11/15/2025 3.623 BB+

Nordstrom Inc.           Corp 112.905 No                  6.95 3/15/2028 4.758 BB+

Tennessee Energy Acquisition Corp. Muni 102.168 No        5.25 9/1/2021 0.451 BBB+

Table 10.1 Bond Information, March 2021 (source: FINRA-Markets.Morningstar.com)

· Column 1: Issuer. The first column shows the company, city, or state issuing the bond. This bond listing

includes two municipal issuers (City of Chicago and Tennessee Energy) as well as several corporate

issuers.

· Column 2: Bond Type. This describes the issue of the bond and indicates whether it is a corporation or a

municipality.

· Column 3: Current Price. The third column shows the price as a percent of par value. It is the price

someone is willing to pay for the bond in today's market. We quote the price in relation to $100. For

example, the Nordstrom bond is selling for 112.905% of its par value, or $112.905 per $100.00 of par value.

If this bond has a $1,000.00 par value, it will sell for                         . Note: Throughout this

chapter, we use $1,000 as the par value of a bond because it is the most common par value for corporate

bonds.

· Column 4: Callable? This column states whether or not the bond has a call feature (if it can be retired or

ended before its normal maturity date).

· Column 5: Coupon Rate. The fifth column states the coupon rate, or annual interest rate, of each bond.

· Column 6: Maturity Date. This column shows the maturity date of the issue--the date on which the
286 10 · Bonds and Bond Valuation

             corporation will pay the final interest installment and repay the principal.
         · Column 7: Yield. The seventh column indicates each bond's yield to maturity--the yield or investment

             return that you would receive if you purchased the bond today at the price listed in column 3 and held the
             bond to maturity. We will use the YTM as the discount rate in the bond pricing formula.
         · Column 8: Rating. The final column gives the bond rating, a grade that indicates credit quality. As we
             progress through this chapter, we will examine prices, coupon rates, yields, and bond ratings in more
             detail

      Types of Bonds

       There are three primary categories of bonds, though the specifics of these different types of bond can vary
       depending on their issuer, length until maturity, interest rate, and risk.

       Government Bonds

       The safest category of bonds are short-term US Treasury bills (T-bills). These investments are considered safe
       because they have the full backing of the US government and the likelihood of default (nonpayment) is
       remote. However, T-bills also pay the least interest due to their safety and the economics of risk and return,
       which state that investors must be compensated for the assumption of risk. As risk increases, so should return
       on investment. Treasury notes are a form of government security that have maturities ranging from one to 10
       years, while Treasury bonds are long-term investments that have maturities of 10 to 30 years from their date
       of issue.

       Savings bonds are debt securities that investors purchase to pay for certain government programs.
       Essentially, the purchase of a US savings bond involves the buyer loaning money to the government with a
       guaranteed promise that they will earn back the face value of the bond plus a certain amount of interest in the
       future. Savings bonds are backed by the US government, meaning that there is virtually no possibility of the
       buyer losing their investment. For this reason, the return on savings bonds is relatively low compared to other
       forms of bonds and investments.

       LINK TO LEARNING

       Government Bonds

         Review this introductory video (https://openstax.org/r/treasury-bonds-prices) about government bonds.

       Municipal bonds ("munis") are issued by cities, states, and localities or their agencies. Munis typically will
       return a little more than Treasury bills while being just a bit riskier.

       Corporate Bonds

       Corporate bonds are issued by companies. They carry more risk than government bonds because corporations
       can't raise taxes to pay for their bond issues. The risk and return of a corporate bond will depend on how
       creditworthy the company is. The highest-paying and highest-risk corporate bonds are often referred to as
       non-investment grade or, more commonly, junk bonds.

       Corporate bonds that do not make regular coupon payments to their owners are referred to as zero-coupon
       bonds. These bonds are issued at a deep discount from their par values and will repay the full par value at
       their maturity date. The difference between what the investor spends on them in original purchase price and
       the par value paid at maturity will represent the investor's total dollar value return.

       Convertible bonds are similar to other types of corporate bonds but have a feature that allows for their
       conversion into a predetermined number of common stock shares. The conversion from the bond to stock can
       be done at certain times during the bond's life, usually at the discretion of the bondholder.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                               10.1 · Characteristics of Bonds 287

The Global Bond Market versus the Global Stock Market

Bonds have long been a trusted investment vehicle for many investors. Though the global fixed-income debt
market remains considerably larger than the global stock market, this is not an entirely fair comparison. Bond
markets include sovereign bonds, or bonds that are issues by governments, while stock markets do not. Some
experts believe that a more relevant comparison is between the value of corporate bond markets only
(excluding sovereign bonds) and total stock market value.
The chart in Figure 10.2 provides global market value information by category so that we may make our own
conclusions about these markets.

            Figure 10.2 Global Bonds versus Stocks: Total Market Values ($Trillions), November 2020 (data source: Nasdaq)

While the total value of bond markets continues to exceed that of stocks, the prevailing trend over the past
several years has been that stock markets are gaining in terms of total market size. The primary reason for this
is that stocks have traditionally outperformed bonds in terms of return on investment over extended periods
of time and are likely to continue to do so. This makes them more attractive to investors, despite the higher
risk associated with stock.

The Two Sides of a Bond Investment

There are essentially two sides to a bond investment, meaning the bondholder will receive two types of cash
inflow from the bond investment over its term. These are the payment of the par value at maturity (often
referred to as payment of the face value of the bond at term end), and the periodic coupon payments (also
called interest income) from the bond. These coupon payments are contractually determined and clearly
indicated in the bond issue documentation received by the bondholder upon purchase.
As a result of these two types of inflow, bond valuation requires two different time value of money
techniques--specifically, present value calculations--to be computed separately and then added together.

The Relationship between Bond Prices and Interest Rates

Bond price and interest rate have an inverse relationship. When interest rates fall, bond prices rise, and vice
versa (see Figure 10.3). If interest rates increase, the value of bonds sold at lower interest rates will decline.
Similarly, if interest rates decline, the value of fixed-rate bonds will increase. An exception to this general rule
is floating-rate bonds (often referred to as "floaters," floating-rate notes, or FRNs).
288 10 · Bonds and Bond Valuation

                                                       Figure 10.3 The Seesaw Effect of Bond Prices and Interest Rates

       A floating-rate note is a form of debt instrument that is similar to a standard fixed-rate bond but has a variable
       interest rate. Rates for floating-rate bonds are typically tied to a benchmark interest rate that exists in the
       economy. Common benchmark rates include the US Treasury note rate, the Federal Reserve funds rate
       (federal funds rate), the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR), and the prime rate.
       So, investors who decide to purchase normal (fixed rate) bonds may not be thrilled to hear that the economy is
       signaling inflation and that interest rates are forecasted to rise. These bond investors are aware that when
       interest rates rise, their bond investments will lose value. This is not the case with floating- or variable-rate
       bonds.
       Bonds with very low coupon rates are referred to as deep discount bonds. Of course, the bond that has the
       greatest discount is the zero-coupon bond, with a coupon rate of zero. The smaller the coupon rate, the
       greater the change in price when interest rates move.

       LINK TO LEARNING
       Relationship between Bond Prices and Interest Rates

         Review this video (https://openstax.org/r/relationship-bond-prices) explaining the relationship between
         bond prices and interest rates within financial and capital markets.

      10.2 Bond Valuation

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Determine the value (price) of a bond.
         · Understand the characteristics of and differences between discount and premium bonds.
         · Draw a timeline indicating bond cash flows.
         · Differentiate between fixed-rate and variable-rate bonds.
         · Determine bond yields.

      Pricing a Bond in Steps

       Why do we want to learn how to price a bond? The answer goes to the heart of finance: the valuation of
       assets. We need to ascertain what a given bond is worth to a willing buyer and a willing seller. What is its value
       to these interested parties? Remember that a bond is a financial asset that a company sells to raise money
       from willing investors. Whether you are the company selling the bond or the investor buying the bond, you
       want to make sure that you are selling or buying at the best available price.
       Let's begin our pricing examples with the 3M Company corporate bond listed in Table 10.1 above. The table

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                             10.2 · Bond Valuation 289

information tells us that 3M issued a series of corporate bonds that promise to pay coupons annually on
September 19 and to pay back the principal, or face value, on the maturity date of September 19, 2026. While
this is not specified in the table, let's say these are 15-year corporate bonds. In that case, we know that they
were issued on September 20, 2011.
The 3M bonds have an annual coupon rate of 2.25%, which indicates that the annual interest payment on the
bond will be the face value (assumed to be $1,000.00 multiplied by 2.25%), or $22.50. The appropriate discount
rate to apply to these future payments is the yield to bond maturity, 1.24%.
Note that the 3M bond is selling at a premium (above par or face value) due to the fact that its coupon rate is
greater than the YTM percentage. This means that the bond earns more value in interest than it loses due to
discounting its cash flows to allow for the time value of money principle.
Finally, the table tells us some of the bond's features. For example, Standard & Poor's, an international rating
agency, rates 3M Co. as A+ (high credit quality). Additionally, the bonds are designated as callable, meaning
that 3M has the option of redeeming them before their maturity on September 19, 2026.
We can price a bond using the same methods from earlier chapters: an equation, a calculator, and a
spreadsheet. Let's start with the equation method (see Figure 10.4).

                                                                    Figure 10.4 Steps in Pricing a Bond

The first step is to identify the amounts and the timing of the two types of future cash flows to be received on
the bond. Any bond that pays interest or coupon payments (coupon bonds) will have two sources of future
cash flow to its bondholder/investor: the periodic coupon payments, which are a form of annuity, and the final
lump sum payment of the face value amount at maturity.
As discussed above, the principal or face value is paid in a one-time lump sum payment at bond maturity. In
our example with 3M Co., this is the $1,000 par value of the bond that will be paid on the maturity date of
September 19, 2026. Step 1 is to lay out the timing and amount of the future cash flows. The first future cash
flow we need to determine is the annual interest payment. Here, it is the coupon rate of 2.25% times the par
value of the bond. As mentioned above, we will use $1,000 as the par value of this bond, so the annual coupon
or interest payment will equal $22.50:

The next future cash flow that we need to determine is the payment of the par value or principal--in this case,
the $1,000 par value of the bond--at the maturity date of September 19, 2026. We can set out the future cash
flows for the bond as shown in Table 10.2:
290 10 · Bonds and Bond Valuation

  Year 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
(Period)

Coupons $22.50 $22.50 $22.50 $22.50 $22.50 $22.50 $22.50 $22.50 $22.50 $22.50 $22.50 $22.50 $22.50 $22.50 $22.50

Principal                                                                                                         $1,000

Table 10.2

Note that annual coupon payments are made each year on September 19, and the first annual coupon
payment date is September 19, 2012. The annual payments continue for 15 years, with the last payment being
made on September 19, 2026. At this point, we can apply previously learned concepts: the coupon payments
constitute an annuity stream, or payments of the same amount at regular intervals.

The principal of $1,000 is also paid out at maturity. Here, we recognize another key concept: the final amount
is a lump sum payment. So, we now have the promised set of future cash flows for the 3M Co. bond.

In Step 2, we will need to decide on a discount rate to use on these future bond cash payments. For now, we
will jump to the answer and simply use the YTM of 1.24% from the bond data in Table 10.1. Later in the
chapter, we will develop the concepts behind how an appropriate discount rate is determined.

For Step 3, we now apply two equations to the set of future cash flows from the bond. This will then provide us
with the present values of these cash flows, or the expected present-day value of the bond. Because we know
that the coupon payments constitute an annuity stream, we can use the equation for the present value of an
annuity (discussed in Time Value of Money II: Equal Multiple Payments. To value the one-time par value
payment, we use the equation for the present value of a lump sum payment. So, by combining these, we will
have the present value of the coupon payment stream, or

So, for our example above, this becomes

Next, we need to determine the present value of the payment of the par or face value of the bond at maturity.
This is calculated as follows:

Inserting our values into this formula gives us

Adding the present values of the two payment streams gives us
Our bond price is $1,137.47. This bond price represents the value of the financial asset to both a willing buyer
and a willing seller.
In this example, the willing seller is 3M Company. The willing buyer is an investor who is demanding a 1.24%
yield on the investment. As per Table 10.1 above, the 3M bond sold for $1,051.20 in March 2021. However, we

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       10.2 · Bond Valuation 291

display the price as a percentage of the par value, so we have the displayed price as

Because we round the percent of par, we do not see the cents digit in the quoted price.

Pricing a Bond Using a Financial Calculator

A financial calculator can also be used to solve common types of bond valuations. For example, what would be
the current price (value) of a 4% coupon bond, paid semiannually, with a face value of $1,000 and a remaining
term to maturity of 15 years, assuming a required YTM rate of 5%? The steps to solve this problem are shown
in Table 10.3 below.

Step                         Description          Enter                                       Display

1 Clear calculator register                       CE/C                                        0.0000

2 Enter future or par value as a negative amount  1000 +|- FV FV = -1,000.0000

     Enter interest rate                          2.5 I/Y                              I/Y =  2.5000
3

   4 Enter periods Enter periods                  30 N                                 N =     30.0000
   5 Enter coupon payment                                                                     -20.0000
                                                  20 +|- PMT PMT                              895.3485
        as a negative amount
   6 Compute present value or price               CPT PV                               PV =

Table 10.3 Calculator Steps for Bond Valuations1

The current price is $895.35.

Time Value Connection

As we have briefly discussed, bond valuation is determined by time value of money techniques, most notably
present value calculations. This makes logical sense when one considers that an investment in a bond involves
a series of future cash inflows, or payments from the bond issuer to the bondholder over the term of the
bond's maturity.

To determine the value of a bond today, the two-step time value of money calculation we discussed earlier
must be used, and the present value of a series of coupon payments (or an annuity) must be determined. This
present value amount will then be added to the present value of a single lump sum payment (the principal or
face value) that will come to the bondholder at the end of the bond's term (maturity).

Fixed Income

Because standard fixed-rate bonds have their coupon payments and maturity amounts locked in, they are
often referred to as fixed-income investments. This is because their values are relatively straightforward to
calculate. Bonds are generally viewed as stable investments that offer income and a lower amount of volatility
compared to stocks.

1 The specific financial calculator in these examples is the Texas Instruments BA II PlusTM Professional model, but you can use other
financial calculators for these types of calculations.
292 10 · Bonds and Bond Valuation

While yields provided by corporate and government bonds such as US T-bills and municipal bonds are
currently low because the Federal Reserve System (the Fed) has kept interest rates low for several years,
investors may still consider adding bonds to their portfolios.2 This is especially true as investors enter their
retirement years and seek to generate income while avoiding the volatility of the stock market. Such investors
can add a mix of individual bonds, mutual funds, or exchange-traded funds to their portfolios, thus generating
potential return while keeping risks at a minimum. Fixed-income investments such as intermediate- or longer-
term bond funds are still providing good yields despite the low-interest-rate state of the economy.

It is important to note, however, that even though bonds are generally thought of as safer investments, they
still are subject to a number of risks. Because income from most bonds is fixed, such instruments can have
their values eroded by external factors such as interest rates and inflation. We will discuss some of these risks
after the next section.

Period 1                           2  3  4  5                6  7  8  9                                     10

End Date 6/30/20 12/31/20 6/30/21 12/31/21 6/30/22 12/31/22 6/30/23 12/31/23 6/30/24 12/31/24

Coupon $4,500 $4,500 $4,500 $4,500 $4,500 $4,500 $4,500 $4,500 $4,500 $4,500

Principal                                                                                                   $100,000

Table 10.4

Table 10.4 shows the cash inflow of a five-year, 9%, $100,000 corporate bond dated January 1, 2020. The bond
will have coupon (interest) payment dates of June 30 and December 31 for each of the following five years.
Because the bond was issued on January 1, 2020, the year 2020 is the first full year of the bond, followed by the
years 2021, 2022, 2023, and 2024, with the bond maturing in December of the latter year.

Cash inflows will be (1) the coupon or interest payments of        , paid to the bondholder

every six months, and (2) the one-time principal or face-value payment of $100,000 upon maturity on

December 31, 2024.

Yields and Coupon Rates

The two interest rates that we associate with a bond are often confusing to students when they first begin to
work with bonds. The coupon rate is the interest rate printed on the bond; this is only used to determine the
interest or coupon payments. The yield to maturity (YTM) is an interest rate that is used to discount the bond's
future cash flow. The YTM is derived from the marketplace and is based on the riskiness of future cash flows.

As we have seen when pricing bonds, a bond's YTM is the rate of return that the bondholder will receive at the
current price if the investor holds the bond to maturity.

Yield to Maturity

As noted above, the market sets this discount rate, or the yield to maturity. The YTM reflects the going rate in
the bond market for this type of bond and the bond issuer's perceived ability to make the future payments.
Hence, we base the yield on a mutually agreeable price between seller and buyer. The bond market
determines the YTM and the available supply of competing financial assets. By competing against other
available financial assets, the YTM reflects the risk-free rate and inflation, plus such premiums as maturity and
default specific to the issued bond.

The YTM is the expected return rate on the bond held to maturity. How do we determine the bond's YTM? We
can use our same three trusty methods: equations, a financial calculator, and Microsoft Excel (as shown at the
end of the chapter).

2 Adam Hayes. "What Do Constantly Low Bond Yields Mean for the Stock Market?" Investopedia. June 15, 2021.
https://www.investopedia.com/ask/answers/061715/how-can-bond-yield-influence-stock-market.asp

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                             10.2 · Bond Valuation 293

Determining Bond Yield Using an Equation
The solution, when solving for discount rates, requires us to revisit the bond pricing formula, which is

Of course, with one equation, we can solve for only one unknown, and here the variable of concern is r, which
is the YTM. Unfortunately, it is difficult to isolate r on the left-hand side of the equation. Therefore, we need to
use a calculator or spreadsheet to solve for the bond's YTM.

Let's take another bond, the Coca-Cola bond, from Table 10.1 above and again back up our time to March
2021. If the Coca-Cola bond has just been issued in March 2021, then it would be a seven-year, semiannual
bond with a coupon rate of 1.0% and an original price of $952.06 at the time of issue (Table 10.5).

      Bond Characteristic           Details

      Price (% of par)       95.20

      Coupon rate            1%

      Maturity date          March 15, 2028

      Standard & Poor's Rating A+

      Coupon payment frequency Semiannual

      First coupon date      September 1, 2021

      Type                   Corporate

      Callable?              Yes

      Table 10.5 Overview of Coca-Cola Bond (as of March
      2021) (credit: FINRA-Markets.Morningstar)

Determining Bond Yield Using a Calculator

For the Coca-Cola bond above, what was the bond's YTM at its issue date? This is not an easy problem to solve
with a mathematical formula. It is far more practical, not to mention easier, to use a financial calculator or an
Excel spreadsheet to solve for bond prices, yields, and maturity periods.

We will cover Excel applications later, but we can jump into some calculator examples right now. So, to
calculate the yield on the Coca-Cola bond, we'll start by entering the values we have for this bond into a
calculator. The values we know are as follows:

If the bond's selling price was $952.06 at issue, we have all the information we need to determine the bond's
YTM at issue. Table 10.6 shows the steps for using a calculator to come to an answer.

Step  Description                                                  Enter  Display

1 Clear calculator register                                        CE/C   0.0000

2 Enter present value or price as a negative amount 952.06 +|- PV PV = -952.0600

Table 10.6 Calculator Steps for Bond's Yield to Maturity at Issue
294 10 · Bonds and Bond Valuation

Step                               Description                          Enter         Display
                                                                   1000 FV
3 Enter future or par value                                        14 N        FV = 1,000.0000
                                                                   5 PMT
4 Enter periods                                                    CPT I/Y     N =    14.0000

5 Enter coupon payment                                                         PMT = 5.0000

6 Compute interest rate                                                        I/Y =  0.8651

Table 10.6 Calculator Steps for Bond's Yield to Maturity at Issue

The calculated I/Y (interest rate or YTM) of 0.8651 is a semiannual figure because the periods and coupon
payments we entered for the calculation are semiannual values. To covert the semiannual value into an annual
rate, we will need multiply the calculated I/Y by 2. This gives us an amount of 1.73%.

So, the YTM of the Coca-Cola bond at issue date was 1.73%. It is important to know that unless otherwise
indicated, bond yields are expressed in annual percentage terms.

We have just demonstrated how a calculator can be used to determine the YTM or interest rate of a bond.
Let's look at a few more examples that cover the most common types of bond problems. These are
determining a YTM, calculating a bond's current price (or value), and determining a bond's maturity period.

First, let's work through another example of calculating a YTM, but this time with a bond that has annual
interest payments instead of semiannual coupons.

Let's say you are considering buying a bond, but you want to calculate the YTM to determine if it will meet
your overall return requirements. Some facts you have on the bond are that it has a $1,000 face value and that
it matures in 12 years. Assume that the current price of the bond is $675 and it pays coupons annually at 3.5%.
See Table 10.7 for the steps to calculate the YTM.

Step                               Description                     Enter            Display

1 Clear calculator register                                        CE/C               0.0000

2 Enter present value or price as a negative amount                675 +|- PV PV = -675.0000

3 Enter future or par value                                        1000 FV FV = 1,000.0000

4 Enter periods (12 years)                                         12 N        N =    12.0000

5 Enter coupon payment                                             35 PMT PMT = 35.0000

6 Compute interest rate                                            CPT I/Y I/Y =      7.7589

Table 10.7 Calculator Steps for Computing Yield to Maturity

By following the steps in the table above, you will arrive at a YTM of 7.76%.

Using a calculator is fast and accurate for finding bond yields. Thus, if you know the bond's current price and
all of the future cash flows, you can find the YTM, or the return rate that the bond buyer is receiving on the
funds loaned to the bond issuer. As mentioned, Excel spreadsheets are as easy and accurate as a financial
calculator for determining bond rates, and we will cover these later in the chapter.

Determining Bond Price or Value Using a Calculator

Let's say a friend recommends a 20-year bond that has a face value of $1,000 and a 6% annual coupon rate. If
similar bonds are yielding 4% annually, what would be a fair price for this bond today? Table 10.8 shows the
steps to make this determination.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           10.2 · Bond Valuation 295

Step              Description                               Enter          Display

1 Clear calculator register                                 CE/C           0.0000

2 Enter future or par value as a negative amount 1000 +|- FV FV = -1,000.0000

3 Enter interest rate (4% annual rate)                      4 I/Y   I/Y =  4.0000

4 Enter periods (20 years)                                  20 N    N =    20.0000

5 Enter coupon payment                                      as 60 +|- PMT PMT = -60.0000
     a negative amount

6 Compute present value or price                            CPT PV  PV = 1,271.8065

Table 10.8 Calculator Steps for Computing Present Value

So, the bond should be priced today at $1,271.81.

Determining Bond Maturity Using a Calculator

Imagine you are considering investing in a bond that is selling for $820, has a face value of $1,000, and has an
annual coupon rate of 3%. If the YTM is 10%, how long would it take for the bond to mature? See Table 10.9 for
the steps to calculate the time to maturity.

Step              Description                               Enter          Display

1 Clear calculator register                                 CE/C           0.0000

2 Enter present value or price as a negative amount 820 +|- PV PV = -820.0000

3 Enter interest rate (10% annual rate)                     10 I/Y I/Y = 10.0000

4 Enter future or par value                                 1000 FV FV = 1,000.0000

5 Enter coupon payment                                      30 PMT PMT = 30.0000

6 Compute periods until maturity                            CPT N   N =    3.1188

Table 10.9 Calculator Steps for Computing Time to Maturity

So, the bond's time to maturity would be 3.12 years.

THINK IT THROUGH

Using a Calculator

If a $1,000 face value bond is selling for $595, has 20 years until it matures, and has a YTM of 6.5%, what are
the coupon rate and the periodic coupon payment of the bond? Follow the steps in Table 10.10.

Step              Description                               Enter        Display

1 Clear calculator register                                 CE/C           0.0000

2 Enter present value or price as a negative amount 595 +|- PV PV = -595.0000

3 Enter periods                                             20 N    N =    20.0000

4 Enter future or par value                                 1000 FV FV = 1,000.0000
296 10 · Bonds and Bond Valuation

           Step                    Description                            Enter         Display
                                                                       6.5 I/Y
           5 Enter interest rate or YTM                                CPT PMT   I/Y =      6.5000

           6 Compute coupon payment                                              PMT = 28.2437

           Table 10.10 Calculator Steps for Computing Coupon Payment

Solution:

The annual coupon payment amount is $28.24. This means the coupon rate on the bond is                       .

The Coupon Rate

The coupon rate is the rate that we use to determine the amount of a bond's coupon payments. The issuer
states the rate as an annual rate, even though payments may be made more frequently. Thus, for semiannual
bonds, the most common type of corporate and government bond, the coupon payment is the par value of the
bond multiplied by the annual coupon rate and then divided by the number of payments per year, 2.

We have already seen the coupon rate. The first bond we reviewed, the 3M Co. bond, was an annual coupon

bond with a coupon rate of 2.25%. Using a par value of $1,000, we determined that the annual coupon

payments would be                        .

For the Coca-Cola bond, we note from Table 10.5 that it has a coupon rate of 1% and is paid semiannually.

Using a par value of $1,000, we can determine that the coupon payments would be                      .

The Relationship of Yield to Maturity and Coupon Rate to Bond Prices

The value or price of any bond has a direct relationship with the YTM and the coupon rate.

· When the coupon rate of a bond exceeds the YTM, the bond sells at a premium compared to its par value.
   That is, market demand will push the price of the bond to an amount greater that than its face or par
   value. We call this kind of bond a premium bond.

· When the coupon rate is less than the YTM, the bond sells at a discounted amount, or less than its par
   value. We refer to such a bond as a discount bond.

· When the coupon rate and YTM are identical, a bond will sell at its par value. Bonds that experience this
   scenario in the market are referred to as par value bonds.

The interest or coupon payments of a bond are determined by its coupon rate and are calculated by
multiplying the face value of the bond by this coupon rate.

The inverse relationship of interest rates and bond prices is an important concept for investors to know.
Because interest rates fluctuate and can change significantly over time, it is important to understand how
these changes will impact bond values.

10.3 Using the Yield Curve

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Use the yield curve to show the term structure of interest rates.
  · Describe and define changes in the yield curve shape.
  · Explain the importance of the yield curve shape.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                    10.3 · Using the Yield Curve 297

Term Structure of Interest Rates

The expected yields of various bonds across different maturity periods are referred to as the term structure of
interest rates. This is because they represent interest rates for different periods of time, maturities, or terms.
When interest rate yields are plotted against their respective maturity periods and these plotted points are
connected, the resulting line is called a yield curve. Essentially, the yield curve is a result of this plotting
process and becomes a graphical representation of the term structure of interest rates. A yield curve will
always be constructed by showing the value of yields (rates) on the y-axis and maturities or time periods on
the x-axis (see Figure 10.5).
To create a useful graph of the yield curve, interest rate yields should be computed for all government bonds
at all remaining times to maturity. For example, the yields on all government bonds with a single year
remaining until maturity should be calculated. This value is then plotted on the y-axis against the one-year
term on the x-axis. Similarly, yields on government bonds with two years remaining until maturity are
calculated and plotted on the y-axis against two years on the x-axis, and so on, until a point of critical mass of
information is reached and the resulting graph displays useful information.
The yield curve for government bonds is also known as the risk-free yield curve because these securities are
thought of as safe investments that are not expected to fail or default and will in all likelihood repay or
otherwise meet all financial obligations made through the bond issuance.

                             Figure 10.5 A Normal Yield Curve: Long-Term Rates Are Higher Than Short-Term Rates

A normal yield curve slopes upward, with yield increasing as the term increases. This is because yields on
fixed-income investments such as bonds will rise as maturity periods increase and produce greater levels of
risk.
Corporate issuers of bonds will usually offer bond issues at higher yields that the government, which is
understandable because they are potentially riskier for investors. Government securities are guaranteed by
governments and have little to no chance of default or nonpayment. This is not the case for corporate bonds,
where there is always a chance of default, though the likelihood of this occurring will vary by individual
company or issuer as well as by bond type and term. We will discuss bond default and default risk next.

 LINK TO LEARNING
 The Yield Curve

  Review this video (https://openstax.org/r/introduction-to-the-yield-curve) that introduces the concept of
  the yield curve.
298 10 · Bonds and Bond Valuation

       Different Shapes of the Yield Curve
       There are two important elements to any yield curve that will define its shape: its level and its slope. The level
       of a yield curve directly relates to the yield rates depicted on the y-axis of the graph (see Figure 10.6). The
       slope of the yield curve indicates the difference between yields on short-term and longer-term investments.
       The difference in yields is primarily due to investors' expectations of the direction of interest rates in the
       economy and how the federal funds rate (referred to as cash rate in many countries) is uncertain and may
       differ significantly over time. As an example, yields on three-year bonds incorporate the expectations of
       investors on how bank rates might move over the next three years, combined with the uncertainty of those
       rates over the three-year period.

                                                          Figure 10.6 Changes in Yield Curve Depending on Cash Rate

       As we briefly discussed above, a positive or normal yield curve is indicative of the investment community's
       requirements for higher rates of return as financial consideration for assuming the risk of entering into fixed-
       income investments, such as the purchase of bond issues. Typically, as a bond term increases, so will the
       potential interest rate risk to the bondholder. Therefore, bonds with longer terms will usually carry higher
       coupon rates to make returns greater for investors. Additionally, economists have come to believe that a steep
       positive yield curve is a sign that investors anticipate relatively high inflation in the future and thus higher
       interest rates accompanied by higher investment yields over shorter (inflationary) periods of time.
       Normal yield curves are generally observed during periods of economic expansion, when growth and inflation
       are increasing. In any expansionary economy, there is a greater likelihood that future interest rates will be
       higher than current rates. This tends to occur because investors will anticipate the Fed or the central bank
       raising its short-term rates in response to higher inflation rates within the economy.

       CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
       How COVID-19 Impacted the Yield Curve

         Figure 10.7 shows the relatively normal-shaped yield curve effective in February 2021.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                 10.3 · Using the Yield Curve 299

                                                             Figure 10.7 Yield Curve in February 2021

A yield curve with an inverted (downward-sloping) shape is considered unusual and will occur when long-
term rates are lower than short-term rates. This causes the yield curve to assume an inverted shape with a
negative slope. An inverted yield curve has historically been observed as a prelude to a general decline in
economic activity and interest rate levels. In some countries, such as the United States, an inverted yield
curve has been associated with upcoming recession and economic contraction.
This may occur because central banks, such as the Federal Reserve in the United States, will often attempt
to stimulate a stagnant economy by reducing interest rates. Essentially, the potential actions of the central
bank to improve the economy have the effect of lowering overall money rates with the economy, which is
exactly what investors anticipated would happen and why the yield curve was inverted to begin with.
The yield curve was considered normal with an upward slope in August 2018, as shown in Figure 10.8, but
the curve inverted in March 2019 as yields on short-term bonds exceeded those of longer-term bonds,
resulting in concerns surrounding impending recession and other economic problems. This inverted shape
to the yield curve continued into 2020, as evidenced in Figure 10.9.

Figure 10.8 The Economy Shifts to an Inverted Yield Curve (data source: US Department of the Treasury, Resource Center,
Daily Treasury Yield Curve Rates)

Yield curves constructed on different days in early 2020 appeared similar to the examples below. Again,
these are obviously not normal yield structures. As a specific example, note on the February 21, 2020, curve
300 10 · Bonds and Bond Valuation

         that rates on five-year securities are lower than those of one-year and even three-month securities.

           Figure 10.9 Elements of Inversion in Recent Yield Curves (data source: US Department of the Treasury, Resource Center, Daily
           Treasury Yield Curve Rates)

         This inverted yield curve signaled the beginning of a recessionary period in the United States, which was
         compounded by the COVID-19 pandemic and the closing of many restaurants and businesses.
         In March and April 2020, the US economy experienced a significant decline. Most economic indicators
         dropped so badly that the National Bureau of Economic Research's Business Cycle Dating Committee, the
         US agency that officially declares recessions, was required to intervene.3
         The recession declaration process by the committee is completed over the course of four months, but in
         this instance, it only took a total of 15 weeks for the committee to make its declaration. This remains the
         fastest declaration by the committee on record since the founding of the National Bureau of Economic
         Research (NBER) in 1978.4
         In July 2021, the committee declared that the economy had reached a trough in April 2020, marking the end
         of the recession of the early 2020s and making it the shortest US recession on record as well as the most
         quickly identified one.5
         (sources: www.nytimes.com/2019/11/08/business/yield-curve-recession-indicator.html; www.nber.org/
         news/business-cycle-dating-committee-announcement-june-8-2020; fredblog.stlouisfed.org/2020/11/are-
         we-still-in-a-recession/)

       A flat shape for the yield curve occurs when there is not a great deal of difference between short-term and
       long-term yields (see Figure 10.10). A flat curve is usually not long lasting and is often observed when the
       curve is transitioning between a normal and an inverted shape, or vice versa.
       A flat yield curve has also been observed as a result of low interest rate levels or some types of unconventional
       monetary policy.

        3 National Bureau of Economic Research. "Business Cycle Dating Committee Announcement June 8, 2020." NBER News.
        4 Jeffrey Frankel. "The US Is Officially in Recession Thanks to the Corona Virus Crisis." The Belfer Center for Science and
        International Affairs. Harvard Kennedy School, June 16, 2020. https://www.belfercenter.org/publication/us-officially-recession-
        thanks-corona-virus-crisis
        5 National Bureau of Economic Research. "Business Cycle Dating Committee Announcement July 19, 2021." NBER News. July 19,
        2021. https://www.nber.org/news/business-cycle-dating-committee-announcement-july-19-2021

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                10.4 · Risks of Interest Rates and Default 301

                                          Figure 10.10 Graph Depicting Normal, Flat, and Inverted Yield Curves

Why Is the Yield Curve Important?

Market technicians, brokers, and investment analysts will study the yield curve in great detail by keeping track
of its many changes and movements. This is because of the overall importance of the yield curve as an
economic indicator and how it can be representative of the ideas, attitudes, and bond market expectations of
individuals as well as large institutional investors that exert significant influence on investment markets and
the economy as a whole.

 10.4 Risks of Interest Rates and Default

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Define interest rate, default, and other common forms of bond risk.
  · Calculate the primary indicator of interest rate risk.
  · Determine factors impacting default risk.
  · Understand bond laddering as an investment strategy.
  · List major rating agencies and their indications of default.
  · Define and calculate the yield to maturity (YTM) on a bond.

Bond Risks

As we touched on earlier, bonds are fixed-income investments, and because of this, they are subject to a
number of risks that could have negative effects on their market value. The most common and best-known
risks are interest rate risk and default risk, but other risks exist that should be understood. Among these
risks are the following:

  · Credit risk. If investors believe that a bond issuer is unlikely to meet its payment commitments, they may
      demand a higher yield to purchase the bond issue in the first place. Due to the relative stability of
      governments compared to corporations, government bonds are considered to have low credit risk.

  · Liquidity risk. If investors believe that a bond may be difficult to sell, it will likely have a higher yield. This
      has the effect of compensating the bondholder for the lack of liquidity (the ability to cash out of the bond).
      Government bonds usually have the lowest yields of all investments available and are typically among the
      most liquid in any country where they are traded. Government securities will only face significant liquidity
      risk in times of great economic distress.

  · Duration risk. Duration risk is the risk associated with the sensitivity of a bond's price to a single 1%
      change in interest rates. A bond's duration is expressed in numerical measurements. The higher the
      duration number, the more sensitive a bond investment will be to changes in interest rates.
302 10 · Bonds and Bond Valuation

         · Call risk and reinvestment risk. Call risk is the risk of bonds being redeemed or called by the issuing
             firm before their maturity dates. Corporations may elect to call a bond issue (provided the bond issue has
             a call feature) when interest rates drop and companies are in a position to save a great deal of money by
             issuing new bonds with lower coupon rates. To investors, this is a risk in and of itself, but call risk also has
             the effect of potentially causing reinvestment risk. Reinvestment risk is defined as the risk to investors
             when they find themselves facing unfavorable alternatives for investing the proceeds from their called
             bonds in new, lower-paying investments. This can potentially lead to substantial financial loss for the
             original bond investors.

         · Term risk. Investors will generally demand higher returns for lending funds at fixed interest rates. This is
             because doing so exposes them to the risks presented by rising interest rates and the negative impact of
             these higher rates on their bond holdings. In a scenario of rising interest rates, investors will find that
             their return from lending money through a bond purchase just once, at a fixed interest rate, will be lower
             than the return they might have realized from making several different investments for much shorter
             periods of time. Term risk is usually measured by a special indicator referred to as the term premium.

       As mentioned above, however, the most common forms of bond risk are interest rate risk and default risk.

       Interest Rate Risk

       As we have discussed, when interest rates rise, bond values will fall. This is the general concept behind interest
       rate risk. Any investor in fixed-income securities (such as bonds) will have to contend with interest rate risk at
       one time or another. Interest rate risk is also referred to as market risk and usually increases the longer an
       investor maintains a bond investment.

       Default Risk

       Any time a bond is purchased, the investor is taking a risk that the bond issuer may be late in making
       scheduled payments on a bond issue--or, in the worst case, may not be able to make payments at all. This is
       the underlying idea behind the concept of default risk.

       Because US Treasury securities have the full backing of the government, they are generally considered free of
       default risk. However, most corporate bonds will face some possibility of default. Obviously, some bonds and
       their issuing companies are riskier in this respect than others.

       To assist potential bond investors in understanding some of these risks, bond ratings are regularly published
       by a number of organizations to express their assessment of the risk quality of various bond issues. We will
       discuss these bond ratings and the companies that issue them next.

      Bond Ratings and Rating Providers

       It is important for investors to know the risks they are assuming when investing in bonds. Many investors will
       take advantage of information provided by bond rating services to assess the likelihood of borrowers (bond
       issuers) defaulting on the financial obligations of their bond issues.

       To help investors evaluate the default risks of bonds, rating agencies (bond rating services) were
       established to evaluate bonds and other fixed-income investments, taking into consideration and then
       analyzing any information that has been published or otherwise made available to the investing public. These
       services then apply a rating system that has been developed for measuring the quality of bonds and assign
       individual grades to each bond and its issuing company.

       The three largest and best-known bond rating providers are Fitch Ratings, Moody's Investors Service, and
       Standard & Poor's (S&P) Global Ratings. The rating system used by these services identifies the very highest-
       quality bonds (the least likely to default) as triple-A (AAA or Aaa), followed next in quality level by double-A
       bonds (AA or Aa), and so on. Any bond that is rated BBB (S&P, Fitch) / Baa (Moody's) or higher is referred to as
       investment grade and is considered strong and stable by the investment community (see Table 10.11).

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 10.4 · Risks of Interest Rates and Default 303

It is important to note that investment-grade bonds are among the most popular due to the fact that many
commercial banks, as well as several pension funds, are only allowed to trade bonds that are investment
grade.

Any bond that is below investment grade, or rated lower than BBB (S&P, Fitch) or Baa (Moody's), is referred to
as a high-yield bond or a junk bond. Junk bonds have had mixed levels of success for companies wishing to
issue them to raise capital. In the early 1990s, the market for junk bonds collapsed, due in part to a political
movement involving influential people who had been dominating corporate debt markets. This movement,
combined with illegal insider trading activities conducted by investments banks, ultimately resulted in the
bankruptcy of former financial giant Drexel Burnham Lambert.6

S&P / Fitch Moody's Grade     Meaning

AAA Aaa  Investment Risk almost zero

AA Aa    Investment Low risk

A  A     Investment Risky if economy declines

BBB Baa  Investment Some risk; more if economy declines

BB Ba    Speculative Risky

B  B     Speculative Risky; expected to get worse

CCC Caa  Speculative Probably bankruptcy

CC Ca    Speculative Probably bankruptcy

C  C     Speculative In bankruptcy or default

D        Speculative In bankruptcy or default

Table 10.11 Bond Ratings (sources: S&P Global Ratings; Moody's)

The market for junk bonds enjoyed a brief resurgence in popularity when the economy improved later in the
1990s. However, in 2001, the junk bond market shrank once again, resulting in 11% of US junk bond issues
defaulting.

In general, it is important to understand that bond ratings are only judgments on corporations' future ability
to repay debt obligation and their growth prospects. There is no fixed methodology or basis for calculating a
bond rating. However, some financial analysts can get a strong indication of how a bond will be rated by
examining certain financial ratios of the issuing firm, such as company debt ratio, earnings-to-interest ratio,
and their return on assets.

 CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

 The Collapse of Enron: Bond and Credit Ratings and How They Change

  The bond rating system is not infallible. A perfect example of this is when energy giant Enron failed in 2001.
  After the collapse, investors correctly pointed out that a mere two months before this occurred, the
  company's bonds were rated as investment grade and considered relatively safe, having little risk for
  investors.

  Background on Enron

  From its formation in 1985 through the late 1990s, Enron grew to become an energy mega-conglomerate,

6 Lawrence Delevingne. "The Drexel Collapse, 25 Years Later." CNBC. February 13, 2015. https://www.cnbc.com/2015/02/13/the-
drexel-collpase-25-years-later.html
304 10 · Bonds and Bond Valuation

         expanding into areas such as trading of futures contracts, paper products, electricity, water, pipelines, and
         broadband services. Reported revenues grew at an exceptional pace, Enron's stock price continued to rise,
         and business was proceeding exceptionally well.

         However, things were not as they appeared on the surface. Enron's financial statements were often very
         confusing to shareholders and analysts. Additionally, Enron's unscrupulous business practices included
         revenue misstatements and other questionable accounting practices to indicate favorable financial
         performance. On top of this, some of Enron's speculative business ventures proved to be disastrous,
         resulting in substantial financial losses.

         Initial allegations against Enron also focused on the role of their public accountants, Arthur Andersen.
         Andersen was one of the Big Five accounting firms in the United States at that time and had served as
         Enron's auditing firm for over 16 years. According to court documents, Enron and Arthur Andersen had
         improperly categorized hundreds of millions of dollars of transactions as increases to the company's
         shareholder equity. It was also later discovered that Andersen failed to follow generally accepted
         accounting principles (GAAP) when considering Enron's dealings with related partnerships. As a result,
         Enron was able to conceal some of its losses from the investing public. After investigation by the United
         States Justice Department, the firm was indicted on obstruction of justice charges in March 2002. The
         combination of all of these irregularities and issues resulted in the December 2, 2001, bankruptcy of the
         corporation.7 It was later determined that the majority of these unethical issues had been perpetuated with
         the indirect knowledge or even, in some cases, by the direct actions of the board of directors or senior
         operational management of the company.

         Specifics and Enron's Bond Ratings

         On October 27, 2001, the company began buying back all its commercial paper, valued at around $3.3
         billion, in an effort to calm investor fears about Enron's supply of cash. On November 8, Enron announced
         that restatements to its financial statements for the years 1997-2000 were necessary to correct several
         accounting violations. However, by November 28, 2001, credit rating agencies had reduced Enron's bond
         rating to junk status.8

         Other Examples of Significant Bond Ratings Downgrades

         Some companies that have recently experienced downgrades (or potential downgrades) to their credit and
         bond ratings include Delta Airlines, Ford, Occidental Petroleum, Carnival Cruises, and T-Mobil. Some of
         these businesses, such as Delta and Carnival, are suffering the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, but the
         hope is that they don't experience the same disastrous fate as Enron.

         (sources: www.britannica.com/event/Enron-scandal; www.journalofaccountancy.com/issues/2002/apr/
         theriseandfallofenron.html; corporatefinanceinstitute.com/resources/knowledge/other/enron-scandal/;
         www.wsj.com/articles/corporate-bond-downgrades-grow-as-coronavirus-spreads-11585849497)

      Concepts of Bond Returns

       Bond investors earn profits through two different means: collecting interest income and generating capital
       gains. These are important concepts for any investor who considers putting their money in fixed-income
       securities such as bonds.

        7 Douglas O. Linder. "Enron (Lay & Skilling) Trial (2006)." Famous Trials. Accessed November 24, 2021. https://famous-trials.com/
        enron
        8 Paul M. Healy and Krishna G. Palepu. "The Fall of Enron." Journal of Economic Perspectives 17, no. 2 (Spring 2003): 3-26.
        https://doi.org/10.1257/089533003765888403

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                          10.4 · Risks of Interest Rates and Default 305

Collecting Interest Income

As we have covered, when investors buy bonds, they are lending money to bond issuers. The coupon rate of a

bond is determined by the issuer and is generally tied to the overall level of interest rates in the economy at

the time of issue as well as the maturity period of the bond and the credit rating of the issuer. The established

coupon rate then governs how much periodic interest is paid to bondholders. For example, if an investor

purchases a 5%, $1,000 bond with a 20-year maturity and annual coupon payments, that investor will receive

20 coupon payments equal to  or           for a total of $1,000.

Depending on interest and inflation rates over the 20-year period, this could be a very favorable situation
resulting in significant realized return for the investor. However, if interest rates and inflation over the
investment period are at high levels, the investment is not nearly as attractive.

Generating Capital Gains

Many bonds are not held until their maturity dates. Should an investor require funds before maturity, they
have the option to sell them through a broker in the secondary market. When this situation occurs, the
investor may earn a capital gain or experience a capital loss, depending on whether the bond ends up being
sold at a premium (above face value) or at a discount (below face value).

For example, if an investor bought a corporate bond yielding 7% and then the economy changed so that
comparable bonds yielded 10%, the investor would have to lower their price on the original 7% bond until it
also yielded the 10% market rate. Potential investors would not be very likely to buy the bond if they could
simply buy a newly issued bond from an alternate issuer and receive a higher coupon rate.

It is equally possible that prevailing bond rates could fall and an investor could end up selling their bond at a
higher price, thus earning a capital gain.

Bond Laddering as an Investment Strategy

There are several successful strategies for successful bond investments, but perhaps one of the most common
yet ingenious of these strategies is called bond laddering. Bond ladders help investors achieve diversity in
their portfolios and reduce risk while helping maintain regular cash inflows in the form of coupon payments or
interest. In a bond ladder, an investor will divide their total investment dollars among various bonds that
mature at regular intervals, thereby balancing risk and return. An example of a bond ladder would be to
purchase 10 different bonds that have maturities of one year, two years, three years, and so on, all the way
through to 10 years.

When the first bond matures, the investor will purchase a new bond that matures in 10 years to take its place
in the ladder and continue the overall laddering strategy.

This strategy has several benefits. First, the shorter-term bonds in the ladder provide stability because they are
less sensitive to risk than longer-term bonds. The longer-term bonds within the ladder will generally provide
higher returns but with higher risk due to such factors as rising interest rates. So, by investing in bonds with
different maturities and creating a bond ladder, investors can realize superior financial returns to what they
would earn by only investing in short-term bonds. Also, the general level of risk from a bond ladder is reduced
by the shorter-term component of the investment mix, making the bond ladder less risky than an investment
that only included long-term bonds.

It is easy to see why bond laddering has become such a highly adopted bond investment strategy with
investors ranging from novice to the most well-seasoned and experienced.

Interest Rate Movements and Bond Prices

We now know that when investors buy bonds, either directly or through mutual funds, they are lending money
to bond-issuing firms or governments. In turn, issuers promise to pay back the principal (par or face value)
when the loan is due at the bond's maturity date.
306 10 · Bonds and Bond Valuation

       Issuers also promise to pay bondholders periodic interest or coupon payments to compensate them for the
       use of their money over the term of the bond. The rate at which issuers pay investors, or the bond's stated
       coupon rate, is typically fixed at the time of issuance.
       We have also covered the concept that bond values have an inverse relationship with interest rates. As interest
       rates rise, bond prices fall, and when interest rates fall, bond values increase. Movement of interest rates can
       have a dramatic effect on a bond's value and presents the typical bondholder with a number of different
       financial risks that we have described in detail.
       Also in this chapter, we have discussed how bond values can be estimated through the use of several different
       factors. Prevailing interest rates are among the most critical of these, but also important are factors such as
       maturity periods, the taxability of bond interest, the credit standing of bond issuers, and the likelihood of bond
       call, or issuers paying off their debt early.
       When considering purchasing bonds or any such fixed-income investment, investors should remain aware that
       interest rates are always in a state of flux and can change at any time. The movements of bond values and
       bond yields will be significantly affected by these changes and can be favorable or unfavorable for any
       investor.

      10.5 Using Spreadsheets to Solve Bond Problems

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Demonstrate bond valuations using Excel.
         · Demonstrate bond yield calculations using Excel.

      Calculating the Price (Present Value) of a Bond

       The following examples illustrate how Microsoft Excel can be used to calculate common bond problems.
       Please be sure to refer to the chapters on the time value of money for examples of using spreadsheets to solve
       present value problems, as these same concepts are also used in solving bond problems.
       You can use the following steps in Excel to determine the price or present value of a coupon bond. Suppose
       that a bond has a par or face value of $1,000, pays coupons semiannually at a 4% annual rate, and matures in
       15 years. We can assume a YTM rate of 5%.
        1. First, select Formulas from the Excel upper menu bar, and from the dialog box, select PV (see Figure

             10.11).

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                 10.5 · Using Spreadsheets to Solve Bond Problems 307

                                                 Figure 10.11 Using Excel to Enter a PV (Present Value) Function

2. When the PV function is selected, another dialog box will appear (see Figure 10.12). It is here that the
     function variables, or arguments, will be entered. It is preferable to use cell addresses to refer to these
     arguments so that the spreadsheet can be easily used again if inputs/arguments change.

                                                               Figure 10.12 Function Arguments Dialog Box

3. Enter the function inputs or arguments (see Figure 10.13). We refer to the cell addresses as per our
     example spreadsheet.
308 10 · Bonds and Bond Valuation

                                                                           Figure 10.13 Completed Data Entry Menu

       Note that the result, the price or present value, will appear in the bottom left section of the Function
       Arguments box once the arguments are entered. It will appear as a negative value because of the sign
       convention and because the bond face value in cell F4 was entered as a positive value.

      Calculating the Yield to Maturity (Interest Rate) of a Bond

       Use the following steps in Excel to determine the YTM (interest rate) of a bond. Assume that you want to find
       the YTM of a $1,000, 3.5% bond with annual coupon payments that is selling for $675.00 and will mature in 12
       years.
        1. First, select Formulas from the Excel upper menu bar, and from the dialog box, select Rate (see Figure

             10.14).

                                                                     Figure 10.14 Using Excel to Enter a Rate Function

        2. After the dialog box appears, enter the variables or arguments. As with our earlier example, we will use
             the preferred method of identifying the arguments with cell addresses (see Figure 10.15).

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                          10.5 · Using Spreadsheets to Solve Bond Problems 309

                                                                 Figure 10.15 Completed Data Entry Menu

3. Again, after all arguments are entered through their correct cell references, the answer will appear in the
     lower left corner of the box. Once satisfied with the result, you can hit Enter to insert this final calculated
     value in your spreadsheet. This has been set up in this sheet in cell H10.

THINK IT THROUGH

Calculating a Coca-Cola Bond to Maturity

Earlier, we covered how a financial calculator could be used to determine the YTM of our Coca-Cola bond

example. If we wanted to use an Excel spreadsheet to perform this calculation instead of a calculator, we

would set up our spreadsheet as shown in the steps below. The current bond price, entered as a negative,

is ($952.06). The bond face value of FV is $1,000; the time period is  , or 14 semiannual periods;

the coupon rate is , or 0.05%; and the coupon payment is $5.00.

1. First, select Formulas from the Excel upper menu bar, and from the dialog box, select Rate (see Figure
     10.16).

                  Figure 10.16 Using Excel to Enter a Rate Function
310 10 · Bonds and Bond Valuation

          2. After the dialog box appears, enter the variables or arguments. As with our earlier examples, we will
               use the preferred method of identifying arguments with cell addresses (see Figure 10.17).

                                                                           Figure 10.17 Completed Data Entry Menu

          3. Again, after all arguments are entered through their correct cell references, the answer will appear in
               the lower left corner of the box. Once satisfied with the result, you can hit Enter to insert this final
               calculated value into your spreadsheet. This has been set up in this sheet in cell H10.

         As noted above, remember that this is a semiannual rate because it was calculated using semiannual
         coupon payments and periods. To express it as an annual YTM rate, you must multiply it by 2.

      Calculating the Maturity Period (Term) of a Bond

       You can use the following steps in Excel to determine the maturity period or term of a bond. Assume that you
       are considering investing in a bond that is selling for $820.00, has a face value of $1,000, and has an annual
       coupon rate of 3%. If the YTM is 10%, how long will it be until the bond matures?
        1. First, select Formulas from the Excel upper menu bar, and from the dialog box, select Nper (see Figure

             10.18).

                                                             Figure 10.18 Using Excel to Calculate Bond Time to Maturity
        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                  10.5 · Using Spreadsheets to Solve Bond Problems 311

2. When the dialog box appears, enter function arguments (see Figure 10.19). Once again, we will use the
      preferred method of using cell addresses as reference points.

                                                                  Figure 10.19 Completed Data Entry Menu

3. When arguments have all been entered, the answer will appear in the lower left of the Function
      Arguments box, as per the above. We arrive at a final answer of 3.12 years until this bond matures.

Calculating Coupon Rate and Interest (Coupon) Payments

Here is how you would determine the coupon or interest rate and coupon payment using Excel. Assume a
$1,000 face value bond is selling for $595, has 20 years until it matures, and has a YTM of 6.5%. What are the
coupon rate and the periodic coupon payment amount of the bond?
1. First, select Formulas from the Excel upper menu bar, and from the dialog box, select PMT (see Figure

      10.20).

                                                    Figure 10.20 Using Excel to Enter a PMT or Payment Function

2. When the dialog box appears, enter function arguments. Once again, we will use the preferred method of
      using cell addresses as reference points (see Figure 10.21).
312 10 · Bonds and Bond Valuation

                                                                           Figure 10.21 Completed Data Entry Menu

        3. When arguments have all been entered, the answer will appear in the lower left of the Function
             Arguments box, as per the above. We arrive at a final answer of $28.24 as the coupon payment.

       The coupon rate can be calculated by taking this coupon payment amount and dividing it by the face value:
       So, the coupon rate is 2.824%.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                               10 · Summary 313

     Summary

10.1 Characteristics of Bonds

Bonds are typically a basic form of investment that entails a straightforward financial agreement between
issuer and purchaser. There are three primary categories of bonds: government bonds, corporate bonds, and
convertible bonds. These different types of bond vary depending on their issuer, length until maturity, interest
rate, and risk.

10.2 Bond Valuation

It is important to ascertain what a given bond is worth to a willing buyer and a willing seller. We can price a
bond using an equation, a calculator, or a spreadsheet. The essential steps are (1) identify the amount and
timing of the future cash flow; (2) determine the discount rate; (3) find the present values of the lump sum
principal and the annuity stream of coupons; and (4) add the present value of the lump sum principal and the
present value of the coupons.

10.3 Using the Yield Curve

When interest rate yields are plotted against their respective maturity periods and these plotted points are
connected, the resulting line is called the yield curve. The yield curve is a graphical representation of the term
structure of interest rates. A yield curve always shows the value of yields (rates) on the y-axis and maturities or
time periods on the x-axis.

10.4 Risks of Interest Rates and Default

Because bonds are fixed-income investments, they are subject to a number of risks that could have negative
effects on their market value. The most common and best-known risks are interest rate risk and default risk,
but there are some others risks that should be understood, such as credit risk, liquidity risk, duration risk, call
risk, investment risk, and term risk. To assist potential bond investors in understanding some of these risks,
bond ratings have been developed and are regularly published by a number of organizations to express their
assessment of the risk quality of various bond issues.

10.5 Using Spreadsheets to Solve Bond Problems

Microsoft Excel can be used to solve common bond problems. It can be used to calculate the value of a coupon
bond, the yield to maturity (interest rate) of a bond, the maturity period of a bond, and the coupon rate and
interest (coupon) payments of a bond.

     Key Terms

bond call a feature of certain bonds or other fixed-income instruments that allows the issuer to repurchase
    and retire these instruments before maturity

bond price the present, discounted value of the future cash stream generated by a bond; the sum of the
    present values of all likely coupon payments and the present value of the par value at maturity

bond ratings grades assigned to bonds by rating services that indicate their overall credit quality
Business Cycle Dating Committee a subdivision of the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), the

    US government agency that maintains a chronology of US business cycles
call risk the risk that a bond issuer will redeem a callable bond prior to maturity
capital gains the increase in a capital asset's value that is realized when the asset is sold
cash rate the interest rate that a central bank, such as the Reserve Bank of Australia or the US Federal

    Reserve System, will charge commercial banks for loans; also known as the bank rate or the base interest
    rate
convertible bonds fixed-income corporate debt securities that yield interest payments but can be converted
    into a predetermined number of common stock or equity shares
314 10 · Key Terms

coupon payment the periodic dollar value of interest that is paid to a bondholder by the bond issuer
coupon rate the amount of annual interest paid by the bond issuer; is multiplied by the face value of a bond

    to determine annual interest or coupon payment amounts
credit risk the risk taken by a bond investor that the bond issuer will default by failing to pay interest and

    repay the principal on schedule
deep discount bonds bonds that sell at significantly lower values than their par values
default when an issuer fails to make scheduled interest or principal payments on its bonds
default risk the risk taken by investors that payments will be delayed or will not occur
discount bond a bond currently trading for less than its par value in the secondary market; offers a coupon

    rate that is lower than prevailing interest rates
duration a measure of how much bond prices are likely to change if and when interest rates move
duration risk the risk associated with the sensitivity of a bond's price to a 1% change in interest rates
Federal Reserve funds rate (federal funds rate) the target interest rate, set by the Federal Reserve, at

    which commercial banks borrow and lend their excess reserves to each other
Federal Reserve System (the Fed) the central banking system of the United States, responsible for

    administering fiscal policy for the country
fixed-income securities investments that provide a return in the form of fixed, periodic interest payments

    and the eventual return of principal at maturity; the most common forms are bonds
floating-rate bonds bonds with variable interest rates that allow investors to benefit from rising interest

    rates
interest income annual interest amounts paid, or coupon payments made, on a bond between its issue date

    and the date of maturity
interest rate risk the risk of investment losses that result from changes in interest rates
investment grade describes a municipal or corporate bond with a rating that indicates it presents a low risk

    of default
junk bonds bonds that have been given a low credit rating, below investment grade; riskier than other

    bonds due to a greater chance that the issuer will default or experience a credit event
liquidity risk risk that stems from the lack of marketability of an investment, meaning that it cannot be

    bought or sold quickly enough to prevent or minimize a loss
London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) a benchmark interest rate at which major global banks lend to one

    another in the international interbank market for short-term loans
maturity date the date on which a bondholder ceases to receive interest payments on a bond investment

    and instead is repaid its par, or face, value
municipal bonds ("munis") debt securities issued by state and local governments; can be thought of as

    loans that investors make to local governments to fund infrastructure
par value also called the face amount or face value; the value written on the front of the bond, which is the

    amount of money that bond issuers promise to be paid at maturity
premium bond a bond that is trading above its par value in the secondary market; offers a coupon rate that

    is higher than the current prevailing interest rates being offered
prime rate the interest rate that banks charge creditworthy corporate customers; among the most widely

    used benchmarks for setting home equity lines of credit and credit card rates, based on the federal funds
    rate set by the Federal Reserve
rating agencies (bond rating services) independent service agencies, such as Fitch, Moody's, or Standard &
    Poor's, that perform the isolated function of credit risk evaluation
realized return the actual return that an investor earns over a given time period through the buying and
    selling of a security
reinvestment risk the risk that an investor will be unable to reinvest cash flows received from an investment
    (e.g., coupon payments or interest) at a rate comparable to their current rate of return
savings bonds debt securities purchased by investors, as a personal investments or as gifts, that the US
    government issues to pay for certain public or government programs

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          10 · CFA Institute 315

term risk the risk of potentially earning lower returns on longer-term bond holdings compared to those
    potentially available when making several shorter-term investments over the same period of time

US Treasury bills (T-bills) short-term US government debt obligations backed by the Treasury Department
    with a maturity of one year or less

US Treasury note rate the interest rate that the US government pays to borrow money for different lengths
    of time; notes are issued in terms of two, three, five, seven, and 10 years

yield curve a line that plots yields (interest rates) of bonds having equal credit quality but differing maturity
    dates; gives an idea of future interest rate changes and economic activity

yield to maturity (YTM) the total return anticipated on a bond if the investment is held until maturity
zero-coupon bonds bonds that are issued at a deep discount from face value and offer no interest or

    coupon payments

     CFA Institute

This chapter supports some of the Learning Outcome Statements (LOS) in this CFA® Level I Study Session
(https://openstax.org/r/study-session-14). Reference with permission of CFA Institute.

     Multiple Choice

 1. When solving bond problems relating to a bond that pays interest on a quarterly basis, the ________ before
     being applied.
      a. quoted annual yield to maturity should be multiplied by 4
      b. quoted number of years until maturity should be divided by 4
       c. quoted annual coupon payments should be divided by 4
      d. stated face value should be divided by 4

 2. Which of the following is NOT an adjustment that must be made when interest is paid semiannually
     instead of annually?
      a. Dividing the annual coupon payment by 2
      b. Dividing the annual interest rate by 2
       c. Dividing the total number of years by 2
      d. Dividing the annual yield to maturity by 2

 3. Which of the following is NOT considered a factor that influences a bondholder's required rate of return?
      a. Financial risk
      b. Other investments by the bondholder
       c. Risk premium
      d. Business risk

 4. How might an investment in a bond fund be affected by a decline in interest rates?
      a. The fund investment would not be affected.
      b. The fund investment would likely decrease in value.
       c. The fund investment would likely increase in value.
      d. Coupon payments from bonds in the fund would decline.

 5. Interest rates and bond prices ________.
      a. are unrelated
      b. have an inverse relationship
       c. have a direct relationship
      d. are both economic factors set by central banks
316 10 · Multiple Choice

 6. The coupon rate of a bond is typically ________.
      a. fixed at the time of bond issuance
      b. subject to change based on the federal funds rate
       c. zero in the case of zero-coupon bonds
      d. Both A and C

 7. A zero-coupon bond is a bond that ________.
      a. has no value
      b. has no periodic coupon payments
       c. has been rated below investment grade
      d. Both A and C

 8. A bond that has a coupon rate less than prevailing interest rates will ________.
      a. sell at par value
      b. sell at a discount
       c. sell at a premium
      d. be overpriced

 9. Determining bond prices often involves using which two TVM (time value of money) equations?
      a. The future value of a lump sum and the present value of a lump sum
      b. The present value of an annuity and the future value of a lump sum
       c. The future value of an annuity and the present value of a lump sum
      d. None of the above

10. A normal yield curve will ________.
      a. slope downward as it moves along its x-axis (term).
      b. slope upward as it moves along its x-axis (yield).
       c. fluctuate depending on the federal funds rate
      d. slope upward as it moves along its x-axis (term).

11. An inverted yield curve is an indication that ________.
       a. long-term yields and interest rates are higher than short-term rates
      b. the economy is in the process of a significant recovery
       c. short-term yields and interest rates are higher than long-term rates
      d. the yields to maturity on all bonds are less than market interest rates

12. Bond laddering is ________.
       a. a risky bond investment strategy that may yield tremendous returns
      b. a strategy in which bonds with several different maturity periods are added to a portfolio
       c. a strategy that involves replacing equity investments with bonds in a portfolio
      d. a bond strategy that sacrifices diversity for potential capital gains

13. A call feature ________.
       a. is desirable to an investor
      b. may cause additional risk for the bond issuer
       c. may cause additional risk for an investor
      d. Both A and B

14. The duration of a bond is ________.
       a. a measurement of the bond's overall risk

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                   10 · Review Questions 317

      b. synonymous with the bond's term
       c. a measurement of how long an investor holds the bond
      d. a measurement of the bond's sensitivity to interest rate changes

     Review Questions

 1. What is a junk bond?
 2. Briefly describe interest income within the context of bond investments.
 3. Briefly describe the two types of cash flow that a bondholder will receive from the issuer.
 4. What is an inverted yield curve, and what is its significance?
 5. Describe reinvestment risk for a bondholder.

     Problems

 1. A $1,000 Expo Corp. bond has a coupon rate of 5%, pays interest semiannually, and matures in six years. If
     the yield to maturity is 7%, what is the bond's value today?

 2. A $1,000 Omega Corp. bond has an 8% coupon rate that is paid semiannually. The bond matures in three
     years. If the current price of the bond is $1,125, what is the yield to maturity?

 3. You are considering buying a bond that is currently priced at $830, has a face value of $1,000, and matures
     in seven years. If interest is paid semiannually and the bond has a yield to maturity of 6%, what is the
     bond's annual coupon rate?

 4. A $1,000 Noah Corp. bond has a coupon rate of 5% with semiannual payments, matures in 10 years, and
     has a yield to maturity of 6.5%. What is the bond's current price?

 5. Chronowerx Inc. has issued a bond that has a face value of $1,000, a 3% coupon rate (with semiannual
     interest), and a maturity date four years from now. If the bond's current price is $895, what is its yield to
     maturity?

 6. You are considering adding a $1,000, 25-year bond to your portfolio. It has a coupon rate of 8%, which is
     paid annually, and your required return is 10%. What is the current price of the investment?

 7. A Cameron Corp. bond has a $1,000 par value, a 5 percent coupon rate paid semiannually, and nine years
     until maturity. If similar investments yield 6%, what is the current value of Cameron Corp. bonds?

 8. McLaren Motors just issued a series of $1,000.00 bonds with a 10-year maturity and an 8% coupon rate,
     paid quarterly. If you purchase a McLaren bond at a price of $920.00, what is your required rate of return?

 9. Three years ago, Petty Partners Inc. issued 15-year, $1,000 bonds that are currently priced at $911.37. If
     the prevailing rate of return on similar investments is 5%, what is the coupon rate on Petty Partners bonds,
     and what is the annual interest payment?

10. A $1,000 Riker Corp. bond has a 20-year maturity and a 6% coupon rate, with interest paid annually. If
      similar bonds from Riker Corp. are yielding 4%, what is the current market value of the Riker issue?

11. A $1,000 bond that matures in eight years, has quarterly coupon payments of $25, and is currently priced
      at $962.00 will have a yield to maturity of ________.
318 10 · Video Activity

     Video Activity

Using TI BA II+ to Price a Bond
Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/ti-ba-pricing-bond)
 1. If you are provided with annual information in a bond problem, which bond variables must be adjusted to

     accommodate semiannual compounding periods, and how must they be adjusted? Review the video to
     follow along as this information is provided.
 2. Following the instructions laid out in the video, practice using a calculator to find the price of a bond under
     two scenarios. The first scenario should be when compounding periods are annual, or once a year, and
     the second scenario should be when compounding periods are semiannual, or once every six months.
     Start out this exercise with the bond factor input variables that are used in the video: par value of $1,000,
     annual coupon rate of 4%, time to maturity of 10 years, and yield to maturity of 8%. Calculate the current
     value or price of the bond under both of the different compounding period scenarios.
     Once you have arrived at the same results demonstrated in the video, practice calculating prices using
     different bond factor variables for inputs, changing time or years to maturity, coupon rate (and coupon
     payments), and yield to maturity until you are completely confident using a financial calculator to find the
     price or value of any bond.
Bond Pricing, Valuation, Formulas, and Functions in Excel
Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/bond-pricing-valuation)
Review the examples included in this video, and practice setting up spreadsheets that solve for each of the five
primary bond variables using the values in the videos (maturity 10 years, coupon rate 10%, coupon payment
$100, yield to maturity 8%, and par value $1,000). Parallel the spreadsheets that are set up in the video,
ensuring that you arrive at the same results for each bond variable amount.
 3. Name and describe the five primary bond variables that can be solved using Excel spreadsheets.
 4. What are the Excel functions that allow you to perform these calculations, and where in the standard Excel
     spreadsheet are they located?

Access for free at openstax.org
11 · Why It Matters                                                                                                               319

11
              Stocks and Stock Valuation

Figure 11.1 In addition to bonds, corporations will often issue common stock as a means of raising necessary capital to finance
future operations. (credit: modification of "New York Stock Exchange Huge US Flag Photo i018" by Grant Wickes/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline

  11.1 Multiple Approaches to Stock Valuation
  11.2 Dividend Discount Models (DDMs)
  11.3 Discounted Cash Flow (DCF) Model
  11.4 Preferred Stock
  11.5 Efficient Markets

      Why It Matters

Similar to bonds, shares of common stock entitle investor owners to a portion of a company's future earnings
and cash flows. However, stocks differ significantly from bonds in how they are issued and managed by
companies, the methodology used to calculate their values in public markets, and how they can generate
income and eventual value for individual investors.

With common stock, there is no specific promise of how much cash investors will receive or when they will
receive it. This differs from bond investments, which are valued entirely on the basis of their guaranteed
timing of future cash flows to bondholders.

This means that with stocks, there are no maturity dates, face values, or coupon payment guarantees. It also
means that stocks do not promise any specified cash flows in the form of coupons or a face value payment at
some point in the future. Instead, stocks (only some, not all) may pay dividends. These dividends are declared
after shares of stock have been issued by a company and then purchased by the investing public. Following a
dividend declaration, the designated per-share amounts are paid to shareholders of record on a specified
date, also determined by a company's board.

Because stock investments carry no guarantee of payments to investors, they are far riskier than bonds and
other forms of fixed-income investments.

While there are many reasons for an investor to choose to purchase common stock, three of the most
320 11 · Stocks and Stock Valuation

       common reasons are
         · to use stocks as instruments or repositories for maintaining value;
         · to accumulate wealth over the term of the stock investment; and
         · to earn income through capital gains and dividend payments.

       As with any financial instrument, common stock purchases offer advantages and disadvantages to investors.
       Important advantages include the following:

         · Returns through dividends and price appreciation of shares can be substantial.
         · Stocks are a liquid form of investment and can be bought or sold within secondary markets relatively

             easily.
         · Information about companies, markets, and important trends are widely published and readily available

             to the investing public.
       These advantages are significant and lead many individuals to move into stock investments. Yet it is important
       to realize that stock has some significant disadvantages, which can include the following:

         · General risk levels are greater than with bonds or other fixed-income investments.
         · Timing the buy-and-sell transactions of stock can be tricky and may lead to losses or not taking full

             advantage of share price opportunities.
         · Dividends (provided that the stock does indeed pay them, as not all do) are uncertain and subject to

             change based on decisions of company management.
       We will discuss these topics in this chapter and cover many of the details regarding why corporations issue
       common stock and why investors purchase that stock.

      11.1 Multiple Approaches to Stock Valuation

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Define and calculate a P/E (price-to-earnings) ratio given company data.
         · Determine relative under- or overvaluation indicated by a P/E (price-to-earnings) ratio.
         · Define and calculate a P/B (price-to-book) ratio given company data.
         · Determine relative under- or overvaluation indicated by a P/B (price-to-book) ratio.
         · Define and detail alternative valuation multipliers, including P/S (price-to-sales) ratio, P/CF (price-to-cash-
             flow) ratio, and dividend yield.

      The Price-to Earnings (P/E) Ratio

       Experienced investors use a number of different methods to evaluate information on companies and their
       common stock before deciding on any potential purchase. One of the most popular techniques used by
       investors and analysts is to study a company's financial statements in order to uncover basic fundamental
       information on the company. This involves calculating a number of financial ratios that help identify trends,
       bringing elements of operational performance to light and allowing for clearer analysis and evaluation.
       A well-proven analytical approach for investors to use in evaluating common stock is to review the overall
       market value of the company that issues a stock. One of the most consistently used calculations in this
       analysis, which has important applications in company and common stock evaluation, is the price-to-earnings
       (P/E) ratio.
       The P/E ratio is computed using the following formula:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                        11.1 · Multiple Approaches to Stock Valuation 321

The P/E ratio is extremely useful to analysts in that it shows the expectations of the market. Essentially, the P/E
ratio is representative of the price an investor must pay for every unit of current (or future) corporate
earnings.

Bottom-line earnings are a critical factor in valuing common stock. Investors will always want to know how
profitable a company is now as well as how profitable it will be in the future. When a company's bottom line
remains relatively flat over a period of time, leaving earnings per share (EPS) relatively unchanged, the P/E
ratio can be interpreted as the payback period for the original amount paid for each share of common stock.

For example, the common stock price of Cameo Corp. is currently at $24.00 a share, and its EPS for the year is
$4.00. Cameo's P/E ratio is calculated as

This ratio would typically be expressed in the form . Essentially, this means that investors are willing to pay
up to six dollars for every one dollar of earnings. It can also be stated that Cameo stock is currently trading at
a multiple of six.

The P/E ratio is typically expressed in two primary ways. The first is as a metric listed by most finance websites
and often carries the notation P/E (ttm). This refers to the Wall Street acronym for "trailing 12 months" and
signals the company's operating performance over the past 12 months.

Another form of the P/E ratio is known as the forward (or leading) P/E. This uses future earnings projections
rather than actual trailing amounts. The leading P/E, sometimes called the estimated price to earnings, is
useful for comparing current earnings to future earnings and helps provide a clearer picture of what earnings
may look like, assuming there are no major changes in the company's operations or accounting treatments.

Referring back to our calculation for Cameo Corp. above, because the current EPS was used in the calculation,
this ratio would be classified as a trailing P/E ratio. If we had used an estimated or projected EPS as the
denominator in the calculation, it would then be considered a leading P/E ratio.

Analyzing a company's P/E ratio alone or within a vacuum will actually tell an analyst very little. It is only when
a company's P/E is compared to historical P/E ratios or the P/E ratios of other companies in the same industry
that it becomes a useful tool for analysis. One of the most important benefits of using comparative P/E ratios
is that they can standardize stocks with different prices and various earnings levels.

Generally speaking, it is very difficult to make any conclusions about a stand-alone stock value, such as

whether a stock that has a ratio of is a good buy at its current price or if a stock with a P/E ratio of   is

too expensive, without performing any relevant comparisons or further analysis.

Analysts have many different ways to interpret P/E ratio data. One of the most common interpretations is that
firms with high P/E ratios should be growth companies. Also, a high P/E ratio could mean that a stock's price is
high relative to earnings and possibly overvalued. This could signal a possible undesired downward
adjustment in market price in the future.

We can extrapolate from the argument above to put forward the idea that stocks with low P/E ratios should be
stabler, more mature organizations. A low P/E might indicate that the current stock price is low relative to
earnings and that there may be an opportunity to take advantage of upward price movements and potential
investment gains through stock price appreciation.

While this information is often very useful for evaluating stocks and making investment decisions, caution
must always be used, as a current stock price may simply be out of line with the company's earning potential,
which would mean that price adjustments are likely to occur in the short term. This is why experienced
analysts and investors will use multiple evaluation techniques when conducting stock analysis and evaluation
and not rely solely on insights provided by a single set of facts or one form of statistical measurement.
322 11 · Stocks and Stock Valuation

      The Price-to-Book (P/B) Ratio

       Another financial ratio commonly used by investors and analysts is the price-to-book (P/B) ratio, also called
       the market-to-book (M/B) ratio. This is a financial metric used to evaluate a company's current market value
       relative to its book value.
       The market value, or market capitalization, of a company is defined as the current price of all its outstanding
       shares of common stock. This is essentially equal to the total value of the company as perceived by the market.
       For all intents and purposes, the book value is representative of the residual of a company after it has
       liquidated all assets and paid off all of its liabilities.
       Book value can be determined by performing some financial analysis on a company's balance sheet.
       Essentially, analysts will use the P/B ratio to compare a business's available net assets relative to the current
       sales price of its stock. The price-to-book-value ratio formula is

       One of the primary uses of the P/B ratio is to understand market perceptions of a particular stock's value. It is
       often the metric of choice for evaluating financial services firms such as real estate firms, insurance
       companies, and investment trusts. The P/B ratio has a notable shortcoming, however, in that it does not
       evaluate companies that have a high level of intangible assets such as patents, trademarks, and copyrights.
       Ultimately, this ratio will tell an analyst exactly how much potential investors are willing to pay for each dollar
       of asset value. The PB(M/B) ratio is computed by dividing the current closing price of the stock by the
       company's current book value per share, which is calculated by either of the following two equations:

       Net book value is equal to net assets, or the total assets minus the total liabilities of the company.
       Analysts often consider a low P/B ratio (less than 1) to indicate that a stock is undervalued and a higher ratio
       (greater than 1) to mean that a stock is overvalued. A low ratio may be an indication that something is wrong
       with the company or that an investor may be paying too much for any residual value should the company be
       liquidated.
       However, many market experts will argue the exact opposite of the above interpretations. Because of these
       discrepancies in interpretation and overall variance of opinion, the use of alternate stock valuation metrics,
       either in addition to or in place of the P/B ratio, is always worth exploring.
       In conclusion, the P/B ratio can help a company understand if its net assets are comparable to the market
       price of its stock. However, as with the P/E ratio, it is always a good idea to compare P/B ratios of companies
       within the same industry and use them in conjunction with other metrics and analytical methodologies.

       LINK TO LEARNING
       Price-to-Earnings Ratio and Price-to-Book Ratio

         Two videos cover the price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio (https://openstax.org/r/price-to-earnings) and the price-
         to-book (P/B) ratio (https://openstax.org/r/price-to-book_ratio). These are excellent introductory videos
         that will provide you with helpful information on what these ratios represent and how they can be used in
         stock valuation.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                        11.1 · Multiple Approaches to Stock Valuation 323

Alternative Multipliers

There are two main types of valuation metrics multiples used to value common stock. These are equity
multiples and enterprise value (EV) multiples. Additionally, there are two primary methods by which to
perform analysis using these multiples. These methods are comparable company analysis (comps) and
precedent transaction analysis (precedents).

Experienced financial analysts advocate the use of multiples in valuation analysis for a number of reasons, the
most important being that they help generate realistic and sound judgments of enterprise values (total
company values), they are relatively easy to use and interpret, and they can provide helpful information on a
company's overall financial condition when used appropriately.

However, it should be noted that simplicity may have some important disadvantages. When such complex
information is reduced to a single equation or final value, it can easily be misunderstood, and the influence of
important factors may be masked or lost in the evaluation process.

What's more, the calculation of multiples represents a snapshot in time for a firm and cannot easily show how
a company grows or progresses. Thus, these calculations are only applicable to short-term analysis, not to
long-term scenarios.

Equity Multiples

Equity multiples are especially useful for investment decisions when an investor aspires to minority positions
in companies. Below are some common equity multiples used in valuation analyses.

The price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio, which we discussed earlier, is probably the most common equity multiple
used in stock valuation because it is relatively simple to calculate and all necessary data are easily accessible by
analysts and investors. The market-to-book (M/B), or price-to-book (P/B), ratio is also useful if assets primarily
drive a company's earnings. Again, it is computed as the proportion of share price to book value per share.

Dividend yield is another form of equity multiple and is primarily used when conducting comparisons
between cash returns and investment types. Dividend yield is computed as the proportion of dividend per
share to share price. The price-to-sales (P/S) ratio is an additional metric used for firms that are experiencing
financial losses. The P/S ratio is often used for quick estimates and is computed as the proportion of share
price to sales (or revenue) per share.

Another useful metric is the price-to-cash-flow (P/CF) ratio. The P/CF ratio is used to compare a company's
market value to its operating cash flow (or the company's stock price per share to its operating cash flow per
share). This measurement is suitable only in certain cases, such as when a company has substantial noncash
expenses (e.g., depreciation or amortization). In some situations, companies may have positive cash flows
but still show a bottom-line loss due to large noncash expenses. The P/CF ratio is helpful for arriving at a less
distorted view of such a company's value.

While these various metrics are important, a financial analyst must always consider that companies often
operate under their own unique sets of circumstances that ultimately will influence many of these equity
multiples.

Enterprise Value (EV) Multiples

The following are some common EV multiples used in valuation analyses:

Gordon growth model is as follows
324 11 · Stocks and Stock Valuation

       EV multiples take an increasingly important role when value decisions surround recent mergers and
       acquisitions. Enterprise value (EV) is a measurement of the total value of a company. Companies often
       believe that EV offers a more accurate representation of a firm's total value than a basic market capitalization
       method. Generally, EV is perceived to offer an aggregate value of the firm as an enterprise, which is a more
       comprehensive measurement (see Figure 11.2).

                                                                Figure 11.2 Enterprise Value: The Complete Picture

       Following are two of the most common enterprise values metrics used in valuing companies and their
       common stock:
       EV/Revenue (EV/R). Also called EV/Sales, EV/R is a valuation metric used to understand a company's total
       valuation compared to its annual sales levels. EV/R can help provide an analyst with an idea of exactly how
       much investors pay for every dollar of a company's sales revenue.
       EV/R is considered a relatively crude metric but can be useful when analyzing companies that have different
       methods of revenue recognition. P/E ratios, for example, can be significantly affected by changes in the
       accounting policies of companies being evaluated. This is another reason why multiple metrics should be used
       in valuations.
       Additionally, EV/R is a useful measure for companies that are consuming cash or experiencing financial losses.
       Such companies may be start-ups or emerging technology firms that have not fully matured and are still in a
       growth stage of development.
       EV/EBIT. A firm's earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) is an indicator of its profitability before the effects
       of interest or taxes. EBIT is also referred to as operating earnings, operating profit, and profit before interest
       and tax.

         · EV/EBITDA. EV/EBITDA is a ratio that compares a company's enterprise value (EV) to its earnings before
             interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization (EBITDA). EBITDA is often used by analysts as a substitute
             for cash flow and can be applied to capital analysis using tools such as net present value and internal rate
             of return. It is relatively easy to calculate, as all information required to compete the calculation is

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     11.2 · Dividend Discount Models (DDMs) 325

      available from any publicly traded company's financial statements. Because of this, the EV/EBITDA ratio is
      a commonly used metric to compare the relative values of different businesses.
  · EV/EBITDAR. Another form of valuation based on enterprise value is EV/EBITDAR. This metric divides
      enterprise value by earnings before interest, tax, depreciation, amortization, and rental costs (EBITDAR).
      This multiple is used in businesses that have substantial rental and lease expenses, such as hotel chains
      and airlines. Capital investment can differ significantly for these firms, and when assets are leased, these
      companies tend to have artificially lower debt and operating income compared to firms that actually own
      their assets.

EV/Capital Employed. The EV-to-capital employed ratio is a measure of enterprise value compared to the
level of capital used by a business. For example, a business with a large capital basis is bound to carry a large
enterprise value simply due to its large capital holdings.

Final Thoughts on Valuation Ratios and Multiples

There are many equity and enterprise value multiples used in company valuation, but the discussions above
cover those that are most commonly used. In any case, gaining a thorough understanding of each multiple
and its related concepts can help analysts make better use of these metrics in their stock analysis and
valuation efforts. Also, as discussed, it is important that analysts and technicians use multiple ratios and
alternate measures for any evaluation of a company and its common stock. Not doing so will limit the ultimate
interpretation of the results, can lead to incorrect conclusions, and may cause fundamental mistakes in overall
investment strategy.

LINK TO LEARNING

Graph of Historical P/E for S&P 500

Look at the 90-year historical average P/E ratio of the S&P 500 (https://openstax.org/r/
90-year_historical_average_P/E). When viewing this information on historical P/E ratios, think about the
following:

· Note that the general trend for historical P/E ratios has been one of growth.

· Note that in May 2009, the P/E ratio reached a staggering  the highest ratio in US history. This

was primarily due to depressed earnings during the Great Recession.

 11.2 Dividend Discount Models (DDMs)

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Identify and use DDMs (dividend discount models).
  · Define the constant growth DDM.
  · List the assumptions and limitations of the Gordon growth model.
  · Understand and be able to use the various forms of DDM.
  · Explain the advantages and limitations of DDMs.

The dividend discount model (DDM) is a method used to value a stock based on the concept that its worth is
the present value of all of its future dividends. Using the stock's price, a required rate of return, and the value
of the next year's dividend, investors can determine a stock's value based on the total present value of future
dividends.

This means that if an investor is buying a stock primarily based on its dividend, the DDM can be a useful tool to
determine exactly how much of the stock's price is supported by future dividends. However, it is important to
326 11 · Stocks and Stock Valuation

       understand that the DDM is not without flaws and that using it requires assumptions to be made that, in the
       end, may not prove to be true.

      The Gordon Growth Model

       The most common DDM is the Gordon growth model, which uses the dividend for the next year (D1), the
       required return (r), and the estimated future dividend growth rate (g) to arrive at a final price or value of the
       stock. The formula for the Gordon growth model is as follows:

       This calculation values the stock entirely on expected future dividends. You can then compare the calculated
       price to the actual market price in order to determine whether purchasing the stock at market will meet your
       requirements.

       LINK TO LEARNING
       Dividend Discount Model

         Watch this short video on the dividend discount model (https://openstax.org/r/
         short_video_on_the_dividend) and how it is used it in stock valuation and analysis.
         The Gordon growth model equation is presented and then applied to a sample problem to demonstrate
         how the DDM yields an estimated share price for the stock of any company.

       Now that we have been introduced to the basic idea behind the dividend discount model, we can move on to
       cover other forms of DDM.

      Zero Growth Dividend Discount Model

       The zero growth DDM assumes that all future dividends of a stock will be fixed at essentially the same dollar
       value forever, or at least for as long as an individual investor holds the shares of stock. In such a case, the
       stock's intrinsic value is determined by dividing the annual dividend amount by the required rate of return:

       When examined closely, it can be seen that this is the exact same formula that is used to calculate the present
       value of a perpetuity, which is

       For the purpose of using this formula in stock valuation, we can express this as

       where PV is equal to the price or value of the stock, D represents the dividend payment, and r represents the
       required rate of return.
       This makes perfect sense because a stock that pays the exact same dividend amount forever is no different
       from a perpetuity--a continuous, never-ending annuity--and for this reason, the same formula can be used
       to price preferred stock. The only factor that might alter the value of a stock based on the zero-growth model
       would be a change in the required rate of return due to fluctuations in perceived risk levels.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                 11.2 · Dividend Discount Models (DDMs) 327

Example:
What is the intrinsic value of a stock that pays $2.00 in dividends every year if the required rate of return on
similar investments in the market is 6%?
Solution:
We can apply the zero growth DDM formula to get

While this model is relatively easy to understand and to calculate, it has one significant flaw: it is highly unlikely
that a firm's stock would pay the exact same dollar amount in dividends forever, or even for an extended
period of time. As companies change and grow, dividend policies will change, and it naturally follows that the
payout of dividends will also change. This is why it is important to become familiar with other DDMs that may
be more practical in their use.

Constant Growth Dividend Discount Model

As indicated by its name, the constant growth DDM assumes that a stock's dividend payments will grow at a
fixed annual percentage that will remain the same throughout the period of time they are held by an investor.
While the constant growth DDM may be more realistic than the zero growth DDM in allowing for dividend
growth, it assumes that dividends grow by the same specific percentage each year. This is also an unrealistic
assumption that can present problems when attempting to evaluate companies such as Amazon, Facebook,
Google, or other organizations that do not pay dividends. Constant growth models are most often used to
value mature companies whose dividend payments have steadily increased over a significant period of time.
When applied, the constant growth DDM will generate the present value of an infinite stream of dividends that
are growing at a constant rate.
The constant growth DDM formula is

where D0 is the value of the dividend received this year, D1 is the value of the dividend to be received next
year, g is the growth rate of the dividend, and r is the required rate of return.
As can be seen above, after simplification, the constant growth DDM formula becomes the Gordon growth
model formula and works in the same way. Let's look at some examples.

 THINK IT THROUGH

 Constant Growth DDM: Example 1

  If a stock is paying a dividend of $5.00 this year and the dividend has been steadily growing at 4% annually,
  what is the intrinsic value of the stock, assuming an investor's required rate of return of 8%?
  Solution:
  Apply the constant growth DDM formula:

  Simplify to the Gordon growth model:
328 11 · Stocks and Stock Valuation

       THINK IT THROUGH
       Constant Growth DDM: Example 2

         If a stock is selling at $250 with a current dividend of $10, what would be the dividend growth rate of this
         stock, assuming a required rate of return of 12%?
         Solution:
         Apply the constant growth DDM formula:

         Simplify and continue the calculation:

         So, the growth rate is 7.69%.

       LINK TO LEARNING
       Dividend Discount Model: A Complete Animated Guide

         In this video for the Investing for Beginners course and podcast, Andrew Sather introduces the DDM,
         (https://openstax.org/r/Andrew_Sather_introduces_the_DDM) demonstrating both the constant growth
         DDM (Gordon growth model) and the two-stage DDM.

      Variable or Nonconstant Growth Dividend Discount Model

       Many experienced analysts prefer to use the variable (nonconstant) growth DDM because it is a much closer
       approximation of businesses' actual dividend payment policies, making it much closer to reality than other
       forms of DDM. The variable growth model is based on the real-life assumption that a company and its stock
       value will progress through different stages of growth.
       The variable growth model is estimated by extending the constant growth model to include a separate
       calculation for each growth period. Determine present values for each of these periods, and then add them all
       together to arrive at the intrinsic value of the stock. The variable growth model is more involved than other
       DDM methods, but it is not overly complex and will often provide a more realistic and accurate picture of a
       stock's true value.
       As an example of the variable growth model, let's say that Maddox Inc. paid $2.00 per share in common stock
       dividends last year. The company's policy is to increase its dividends at a rate of 5% for four years, and then
       the growth rate will change to 3% per year from the fifth year forward. What is the present value of the stock if
       the required rate of return is 8%? The calculation is shown in Table 11.1.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                           11.2 · Dividend Discount Models (DDMs) 329

Year   Growth      Dividend        Value after Year 4      PV Discount Factor at  Present Value of Dividend
           %            ($)                   ($)                        8%                        ($)
  0            5%            2.00
  1            5%            2.10         50.07886         1.0800                             1.9444
  2            5%            2.21                          1.1664                             1.8904
  3            5%            2.32                          1.2597                             1.8379
  4            5%            2.43                          1.3605                             1.7869
  5            3%            2.50                          1.4693                            35.7870
                                                                                  Total: $43.2466

Table 11.1 Value of Stock with 8% Required Rate of Return

Note:

The value of Maddox stock in this example would be $43.25 per share.

Two-Stage Dividend Discount Model

The two-stage DDM is a methodology used to value a dividend-paying stock and is based on the assumption of
two primary stages of dividend growth: an initial period of higher growth and a subsequent period of lower,
more stable growth.

The two-stage DDM is often used with mature companies that have an established track record of making
residual cash dividend payments while experiencing moderate rates of growth. Many analysts like to use the
two-stage model because it is reasonably grounded in reality. For example, it is probably a more reasonable
assumption that a firm that had an initial growth rate of 10% might see its growth drop to a more modest level
of, say, 5% as the company becomes more established and mature, rather than assuming that the firm will
maintain the initial growth rate of 10%. Experts tend to agree that firms that have higher payout ratios of
dividends may be well suited to the two-stage DDM.

As we have seen, the assumptions of the two-stage model are as follows:

  · The first period analyzed will be one of high initial growth.
  · This stage of higher growth will eventually transition into a period of more mature, stable, and sustainable

      growth at a lower rate than the initial high-growth period.
  · The dividend payout ratio will be based on company performance and the expected growth rate of its

      operations.

Let's use an example. Lore Ltd. estimates that its dividend growth will be 13% per year for the next five years.
It will then settle to a sustainable, constant, and continuing rate of 5%. Let's say that the current year's
dividend is $14 and the required rate of return (or discount rate) is 12%. What is the current value of Lore Ltd.
stock?

Step 1:

First, we will need to calculate the dividends for each year until the second, stable growth rate phase is
reached. Based on the current dividend value of $14 and the anticipated growth rate of 13%, the values of
dividends (D1, D2, D3, D4, D5) can be determined for each year of the first phase. Because the stable growth
rate is achieved in the second phase, after five years have passed, if we assume that the current year is 2021,
we can lay out the profile for this stock's dividends through the year 2026, as per Figure 11.3.
330 11 · Stocks and Stock Valuation

                                                        Figure 11.3 Profile of Stock Dividend through 2026

Step 2:
Next, we apply the DDM to determine the terminal value, or the value of the stock at the end of the five-year
high-growth phase and the beginning of the second, lower growth-phase.
We can apply the DDM formula at any point in time, but in this example, we are working with a stock that has
constant growth in dividends for five years and then decreases to a lower growth rate in its secondary phase.
Because of this timing and dividend structure, we calculate the value of the stock five years from now, or the
terminal value. Again, this is calculated at the end of the high-growth phase, in 2026. By applying the constant
growth DDM formula, we arrive at the following:

The terminal value can be calculated by applying the DDM formula in Excel, as seen in Figure 11.4 and Figure
11.5. The terminal value, or the value at the end of 2026, is $386.91.

         Figure 11.4 Terminal Value at the End of 2026 (Showing Formula)

                                     Figure 11.5 Terminal Value at the End of 2026

Step 3:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                 11.2 · Dividend Discount Models (DDMs) 331

Next, we find the PV of all paid dividends that occur during the high-growth period of 2022-2026. This is shown
in Figure 11.6. Our required rate of return (discount rate) is 12%.

                                                  Figure 11.6 Present Value of All Paid Dividends, 2022-2026

Step 4:
Next, we calculate the PV of the single lump-sum terminal value:

Remember that due to the sign convention, either the FV must be entered as a negative value or, if entered as
a positive value, the resulting PV will be negative. This example shows the former.
Step 5:
Our next step is to find the current fair (intrinsic) value of the stock, which comprises the PV of all future
dividends plus the PV of the terminal value. This is represented in the following formula, with all factors shown
in Figure 11.7:

                                                                    Figure 11.7 Fair Value of the Stock
332 11 · Stocks and Stock Valuation

       So, we end up with a total current fair value of Lore Ltd. stock of $291.44 (due to Excel's rounding), although
       the sum can also be calculated as shown below:

       LINK TO LEARNING

       Determining Stock Value

         Take a few minutes to review this video, which covers methods used to determine stock value
         (https://openstax.org/r/covers_methods_used_to_determine_stock_value) when dividend growth is
         nonconstant.

      Advantages and Limitations of DDMs

       Some of the primary advantages of DDMs are their basis in the sound logic of present value concepts, their
       consistency, and the implication that companies that pay dividends tend to be mature and stable entities. Also,
       because the model is essentially a mathematical formula, there is little room for misinterpretation or
       subjectivity. As a result of these advantages, DDMs are a very popular form of stock evaluation that most
       analysts show faith in.

       Because dividends are paid in cash, companies may keep making their dividend payments even when doing so
       is not in their best long-term interests. They may not want to manipulate dividend payments, as this can
       directly lead to stock price volatility. Rather, they may manipulate dividend payments in the interest of buoying
       up their stock price.

       To further illustrate limitations of DDMs, let's examine the Concepts in Practice case.

       CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

       Limitations of DDMs

         A major limitation of the dividend discount model is that it cannot be used to value companies that do not
         pay dividends. This is becoming a growing trend, particularly for young high-tech companies. Warren
         Buffett, CEO of Berkshire Hathaway, has stated that companies are usually better off if they take their
         excess funds and reinvest them into infrastructure, evolving technologies, and other profitable ventures.
         The payment of dividends to shareholders is "almost a last resort for corporate management,"1 says
         Buffett, and cash balances should be invested in "projects to become more efficient, expand territorially,
         extend and improve product lines or . . . otherwise widen the economic moat separating the company from
         its competitors."2 Berkshire follows this practice of reinvesting cash rather than paying dividends, as do
         tech companies such as Amazon, Google, and Biogen.3 So, rather than receiving cash dividends,
         stockholders of these companies are rewarded by seeing stock price appreciation in their investments and
         ultimately large capital gains when they finally decide to sell their shares.

         The sensitivity of assumptions is also a drawback of using DDMs. The fair price of a stock can be highly
         sensitive to growth rates and the required rates of return demanded by investors. A single percentage
         point change in either of these two factors can have a dramatic impact on a company's stock, potentially
         changing it by as much as 10 to 20%.

        1 Dan Caplinger. "Why Don't These Winning Stocks Pay Dividends?" The Motley Fool. Updated October 3, 2018.
        https://www.fool.com/investing/general/2015/03/01/why-dont-these-winning-stocks-pay-dividends.aspx
        2 The Motley Fool. "Why Warren Buffet's Berkshire Hathaway Won't Pay a Dividend in 2015." Nasdaq. November 16, 2014.
        https://www.nasdaq.com/articles/why-warren-buffetts-berkshire-hathaway-wont-pay-dividend-2015-2014-11-16.
        3 Caplinger, "Why Don't These Winning Stocks Pay Dividends?" The Motley Fool.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                 11.2 · Dividend Discount Models (DDMs) 333

  Finally, the results obtained using DDMs may not be related to the results of a company's operations or its
  profitability. Dividend payments should theoretically be tied to a company's profitability, but in some
  instances, companies will make misguided efforts to maintain a stable dividend payout even through the
  use of increased borrowing and debt, which is not beneficial to an organization's long-term financial health.
  (sources: www.wallstreetmojo.com/dividend-discount-model/; pages.stern.nyu.edu/~adamodar/pdfiles/
  valn2ed/ch13d.pdf; www.managementstudyguide.com/disadvantages-of-dividend-discount-model.htm)

Stock Valuation with Changing Growth Rates and Time Horizons
Before we move on from our discussion of dividend discount models, let's work through some more examples
of how the DDM can be used with a number of different scenarios, changing growth rates, and time horizons.
As we have seen, the value or price of a financial asset is equal to the present value of the expected future
cash flows received while maintaining ownership of the asset. In the case of stock, investors receive cash flows
in the form of dividends from the company, plus a final payout when they decide to relinquish their ownership
rights or sell the stock.
Let's look at a simple illustration of the price of a single share of common stock when we know the future
dividends and final selling price.
Problem:
Steve wants to purchase shares of Old Peak Construction Company and hold these common shares for five
years. The company will pay $5.00 annual cash dividends per share for the next five years.
At the end of the five years, Steve will sell the stock. He believes that he will be able to sell the stock for $25.00
per share. If Steve wants to earn 10% on this investment, what price should he pay today for this stock?
Solution:
The current price of the stock is the discounted cash flow that Steve will receive over the next five years while
holding the stock. If we let the final price represent a lump-sum future value and treat the dividend payments
as an annuity stream over the next five years, we can apply the time value of money concepts we covered in
earlier chapters.
Method 1: Using an Equation

Method 2: Using a Financial Calculator
We can also use a calculator or spreadsheet to find the price of the stock (see Table 11.2).
334 11 · Stocks and Stock Valuation

            Step                     Description  Enter Display

            1 Clear calculator register           CE/C                            0.00

            2 Enter number of periods (5)         5N                         N =  5.00

            3 Enter rate of return or interest rate (10%) 10 I/Y I/Y = 10.00

            4 Enter eventual sales price ($25)    25 FV FV = 25.00

            5 Enter dividend amount ($5)          5 PMT PMT = 5.00

            6 Compute present value               CPT PV PV = - 34.47

            Table 11.2 Calculator Steps for Finding the Price of the Stock4

The stock price is calculated as $34.47.

Note that the value given is expressed as a negative value due to the sign convention used by financial
calculators. We know the actual stock value is not negative, so we can just ignore the minus sign.

In cases such as the above, we find the present value of a dividend stream and the present value of the lump-
sum future price. So, if we know the dividend stream, the future price of the stock, the future selling date of
the stock, and the required return, it is possible to price stocks in the same manner that we price bonds.

Method 3: Using Excel

Figure 11.8 shows a spreadsheet setup in Excel to reach a solution to this problem.

                                                 Figure 11.8 Excel Solution for Finding the Price of the Stock

Due to the sign convention in Excel, we can ignore the parentheses around the solution, which indicate a
negative value. Therefore, the price is $34.48. The Excel command used in cell F6 to calculate present value is
as follows:

                                                   =PV(rate,nper,pmt,[fv],[type])

Finding Stock Price with Constant Dividends

Example 1:

Four Seasons Resorts pays a $0.25 dividend every quarter and will maintain this policy forever. What price
should you pay for one share of common stock if you want an annual return of 10% on your investment?

Solution:

You can restate your annual required rate of 10% as a quarterly rate of           . Apply the quarterly
dividend amount and the quarterly rate of return to determine the price:

4 The specific financial calculator in these examples is the Texas Instruments BA II PlusTM Professional model, but you can use other
financial calculators for these types of calculations.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                 11.2 · Dividend Discount Models (DDMs) 335

Even though we anticipate that companies will be in business "forever," we are not going to own a company's
stock forever. Therefore, the dividend stream to which we would have legal claim is only for that period of the
company's life during which we own the stock. We need to modify the dividend model to account for a finite
period when we will sell the stock at some future time. This modification brings us from an infinite to a finite
dividend pricing model, which we will use to price a finite amount of dividends and the future selling price of
the stock. We will maintain a constant dividend assumption. Let's assume we will hold a share in a company
that pays a $1 dividend for 20 years and then sell the stock.
Method 1: Using an Equation
The dividend pricing model under a finite horizon is a concept we have seen earlier. It is a simple present value
annuity stream application:

We now need to determine the selling price that we would get in 20 years if we were to sell the stock to
someone else at that time. What would a willing buyer give us for the stock 20 years from now? This price is
difficult to estimate, so for the sake of this exercise, we will assume that the price in 20 years will be $30. So,
what is the present value of the price in 20 years with a 10% discount rate? Again, this is just a simple
application of the PV formula we covered earlier in the text:

We can now price the stock as if it were a bond with a dividend stream of 20 years, a sales price in 20 years,
and a required return of 10%:

  · The dividend stream is analogous to the coupon payments.
  · The sales price is analogous to the bond's principal.
  · The 20-year investment horizon is analogous to the bond's maturity date.
  · The required return is analogous to the bond's yield.
Carrying on with the PV calculations, we have

Method 2: Using a Financial Calculator

We can also use a calculator or spreadsheet to find the price of the stock using constant dividends (see Table
11.3).

Step  Description                        Enter  Display
                                        CE/C             0.00
1 Clear calculator register

Table 11.3 Calculator Steps for Finding the Price of Stock Using Constant
Dividends
336 11 · Stocks and Stock Valuation

Step                                 Description  Enter Display

2 Enter number of periods (20)                    20 N N = 20.00

3 Enter rate of return or interest rate (10%) 10 I/Y I/Y = 10.00

4 Enter eventual sales price (30)                 30 FV FV = 30.00

5 Enter dividend amount ($1)                      1 PMT PMT = 1.00

6 Compute present value                           CPT PV PV = -12.97

Table 11.3 Calculator Steps for Finding the Price of Stock Using Constant
Dividends

The stock price resulting from the calculation is $12.97.
Method 3: Using Excel
This same problem can be solved using Excel with a setup similar to that shown in Figure 11.9.

                                Figure 11.9 Excel Solution for Finding the Price of Stock Using Constant Dividends

Once again, we can ignore the negative indicator that is generated by the Excel sign convention because we
know that the stock will not have a negative value 20 years from now. Therefore, the price is $12.97. The Excel
command used in cell F13 to calculate present value is as follows:

                                                   =PV(rate,nper,pmt,[fv],[type])
Example 2:
Let's look at an example and estimate current stock price given a 10.44% constant growth rate of dividends
forever and a desired return on the stock of 13.5%. We will assume that the current stock owner has just
received the most recent dividend, D0, and the new buyer will receive all future cash dividends, beginning with
D1. This part of the setup of the model is important because the price reflects all future dividends, starting with
D1, discounted back to today. (Price0 refers to the price at time zero, or today.) The first dividend the buyer
would receive is one full period away. Using the discounted cash flow approach, we have

where g is the annual growth rate of the dividends and r is the required rate of return on the stock. We can
simplify the equation above into the following:

As we discussed above, this classic model of constant dividend growth, known as the Gordon growth model, is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                 11.2 · Dividend Discount Models (DDMs) 337

a fundamental method of stock pricing. The Gordon growth model determines a stock's value based on a
future stream of dividends that grows at a constant rate. Again, we assume that this constantly growing
dividend stream will pay forever. To see how the constant growth model works, let's use our example from
above once again as a test case. The most recent dividend (D0) is $1.76, the growth rate (g) is 10.44%, and the
required rate of return (r) is 13.5%, so applying our PV equation, we have

Our estimated price for this example is $63.52. Notice that the formula requires the return rate r to be greater
than the growth rate g of the dividend stream. If g were greater than r, we would be dividing by a negative
number and producing a negative price, which would be meaningless.
Let's pick another company and see if we can apply the dividend growth model and price the company's stock
with a different dividend history. In addition, our earlier example will provide a shortcut method to estimate g,
although you could still calculate each year's percentage change and then average the changes over the 10
years.
Estimating a Stock Price from a Past Dividend Pattern
Problem:
Phased Solutions Inc. has paid the following dividends per share from 2011 to 2020:

                            2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
                           $0.070 $0.080 $0.925 $1.095 $1.275 $1.455 $1.590 $1.795 $1.930 $2.110

                                Table 11.4

If you plan to hold this stock for 10 years, believe Phased Solutions will continue this dividend pattern forever,
and you want to earn 17% on your investment, what would you be willing to pay per share of Phased Solutions
stock as of January 1, 2021?
Solution:
First, we need to estimate the annual growth rate of this dividend stream. We can use a shortcut to determine
the average growth rate by using the first and last dividends in the stream and the time value of money
equation. We want to find the average growth rate given an initial dividend (present value) of $0.70, the most
recent dividend (future value) of $2.11, and the number of years (n) between the two dividends, or the number
of dividend changes, which is 9. So, we calculate the average growth rate as follows:

Table 11.5 shows the step-by-step process of using a financial calculator to solve for the growth rate.

Step  Description                                        Enter  Display

1 Clear calculator register                              CE/C   0.0000

2 Enter number of periods (9)                            9N     N = 9.0000

3 Enter present value or initial dividend ($0.70) as a negative 0.7 +|- PV PV = -0.7000
     value

Table 11.5 Calculator Steps for Solving the Growth Rate
338 11 · Stocks and Stock Valuation

Step                                 Description               Enter     Display
                                                            2.11 FV   FV = 2.1100
4 Enter future value or the most recent dividend ($2.11)

5 Enter a zero value for payment as a placeholder, as this  0 PMT     PMT 0.0000
     factor is not used here

6 Compute annual growth rate                                CPT I/Y I/Y = 13.0427

Table 11.5 Calculator Steps for Solving the Growth Rate

The calculated growth rate is 13.04%.

We can also use Excel to set up a spreadsheet similar to the one in Figure 11.10 that will calculate this growth
rate.

                                                             Figure 11.10 Excel Solution for Growth Rate

The Excel command used in cell G22 to calculate the growth rate is as follows:
                                            =RATE(nper,pmt,pv,[fv],[type],[guess])

We now have two methods to estimate g, the growth rate of the dividends. The first method, calculating the
change in dividend each year and then averaging these changes, is the arithmetic approach. The second
method, using the first and last dividends only, is the geometric approach. The arithmetic approach is
equivalent to a simple interest approach, and the geometric approach is equivalent to a compound interest
approach.
To apply our PV formula above, we had to assume that the company would pay dividends forever and that we
would hold on to our stock forever. If we assume that we will sell the stock at some point in the future,
however, can we use this formula to estimate the value of a stock held for a finite period of time? The answer
is a qualified yes. We can adjust this model for a finite horizon to estimate the present value of the dividend
stream that we will receive while holding the stock. We will still have a problem estimating the stock's selling
price at the end of this finite dividend stream, and we will address this issue shortly. For the finite growing
dividend stream, we adjust the infinite stream in our earlier equation to the following:

where n is the number of future dividends.
This equation may look very complicated, but just focus on the far right part of the model. This part calculates
the percentage of the finite dividend stream that you will receive if you sell the stock at the end of the nth year.
Say you will sell Johnson & Johnson after 10 years. What percentage of the $60.23 (the finite dividend stream)
will you get? Begin with the following:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                 11.2 · Dividend Discount Models (DDMs) 339

Now, multiply the result by the price for your portion of the infinite stream:

The next step is to discount the selling price of Johnson & Johnson in 10 years at 17% and then add the two
values to get the stock's price. So, how do we estimate the stock's price at the end of 10 years? If we elect to
sell the stock after 10 years and the company will continue to pay dividends at the same growth rate, what
would a buyer be willing to pay? How could we estimate the selling price (value) of the stock at that time?
We need to estimate the dividend in 10 years and assume a growth rate and the required return of the new
owner at that point in time. Let's assume that the new owner also wants a 17% return and that the dividend
growth rate will remain at 13.04%. We calculate the dividend in 10 years by taking the current growth rate plus
one raised to the tenth power times the current dividend:

We then use the dividend growth model with infinite horizon to determine the price in 10 years as follows:
Your price for the stock today--given that you will receive the growing dividend stream for 10 years and sell
for $258.10 in 10 years, and also given that you want a 17% return over the 10 years--is as shown below:

Why did you get the same price of $60.23 for your stock with both the infinite growth model and the finite
model? The reason is that the required rate of return of the stock remained at 17% (your rate) and the growth
rate of the dividends remained at 13.04%. The infinite growth model gives the same price as the finite model
with a future selling price as long as the required return and the growth rate are the same for all future sales
of the stock.
Although this point may be subtle, what we have just shown is that a stock's price is the present value of its
future dividend stream. When you sell the stock, the buyer purchases the remaining dividend stream. If that
individual should sell the stock in the future, the new owner would buy the remaining dividends. That will
always be the case; a stock's buyer is always buying the future dividend stream.

 LINK TO LEARNING
 Determining Stock Value Using Different Scenarios

  This video explains methods for determining stock value (https://openstax.org/r/
  explains_methods_for_determining_stock_value) using scenarios of constant dividends and scenarios of
  constant dividend growth.

 THINK IT THROUGH
 Nonconstant Growth Dividends

  One final issue to address in this section is how we price a stock when dividends are neither constant nor
  growing at a constant rate. This can make things a bit more complicated. When a future pattern is not an
  annuity or the modified annuity stream of constant growth, there is no shortcut. You have to estimate every
340 11 · Stocks and Stock Valuation

future dividend and then discount each individual dividend back to the present. All is not lost, however.
Sometimes you can see patterns in the dividends. For example, a firm might shift into a dividend stream
pattern that will allow you to use one of the dividend models to take a shortcut for pricing the stock. Let's
look at an example.

JM and Company is a small start-up firm that will institute a dividend payment--a $0.25 dividend--for the
first time at the end of this year. The company expects rapid growth over the next four years and will
increase its dividend to $0.50, then to $1.50, and then to $3.00 before settling into a constant growth
dividend pattern with dividends growing at 5% every year (see Table 11.6). If you believe that JM and
Company will deliver this dividend pattern and you desire a 13% return on your investment, what price
should you pay for this stock?

                                     T0 T1 T2 T3 T4                  T5

                                     $0.25 $0.50 $1.50 $1.275 $3.00

                                     Table 11.6

Solution: To price this stock, we will need to discount the first four dividends at 13% and then discount the
constant growth portion of the dividends, the first payment of which will be received at the end of year 5.
Let's calculate the first four dividends:

  We now turn to the constant growth dividend pattern, where we can use our infinite horizon constant
  growth model as follows:

  This figure is the price of the constant growth portion at the end of the fourth period, so we still need to
  discount it back to the present at the 13% required rate of return:

  So, the price of this stock with a nonconstant dividend pattern is

Some Final Thoughts on Dividend Discount Models

The dividend used to calculate a price is the expected future payout and expected future dividend growth. This
means the DDM is most useful when valuing companies that have long, consistent dividend records.
If the DDM formula is applied to a company with a limited dividend history, or in an industry exposed to
significant risks that could affect a company's ability to maintain its payout, the resulting derived value may
not be entirely accurate.
In most cases, dividend models, whether constant growth or constant dividend, appeal to a fundamental
concept of asset pricing: the future cash flow to which the owner is entitled while holding the asset and the
required rate of return for that cash flow determine the value of a financial asset. However, problems can arise
when using these models because the timing and amounts of future cash flows may be difficult to predict.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                11.3 · Discounted Cash Flow (DCF) Model 341

 11.3 Discounted Cash Flow (DCF) Model

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Explain how the DCF model differs from DDMs.
  · Apply the DCF model.
  · Explain the advantages and disadvantages of the DCF model.

When investors buy stock, they do so in order to receive cash inflows at different points in time in the future.
These inflows come in the form of cash dividends (provided the stock does indeed pay dividends, because not
all do) and also in the form of the final cash inflow that will occur when the investor decides to sell the stock.

The investor hopes that the final sale price of the stock will be higher than the purchase price, resulting in a
capital gain. The hope for capital gains is even stronger in the case of stocks that do not pay dividends. When
securities have been held for at least one year, the seller is eligible for long-term capital gains tax rates, which
are lower than short-term rates for most investors. This makes non-dividend-paying stocks even more
attractive, provided that they do indeed appreciate in value over the investor's holding period. Meanwhile,
short-term gains, or gains made on securities held for less than one year, are taxed at ordinary income tax
rates, which are usually higher and offer no particular advantage to an investor in terms of reducing their
taxes.

Understanding How the DCF Model Differs from DDMs

The valuation of an asset is typically based on the present value of future cash flows that are generated by the
asset. It is no different with common stock, which brings us to another form of stock valuation: the
discounted cash flow (DCF) model. The DCF model is usually used to evaluate firms that are relatively young
and do not pay dividends to their shareholders. Examples of such companies include Facebook, Amazon,
Google, Biogen, and Monster Beverage. The DCF model differs from the dividend discount models we covered
earlier, as DDM methodologies are almost entirely based on a stock's periodic dividends.

The DCF model is an absolute valuation model, meaning that it does not involve comparisons with other firms
within any specific industry but instead uses objective data to evaluate a company on a stand-alone basis. The
DCF model focuses on a company's cash flows, determining the present value of the entire organization and
then working this down to the share-value level based on total shares outstanding of the subject organization.
This highly regarded methodology is the evaluation tool of choice for experienced financial analysts when
evaluating companies and their common stock. Many analysts prefer DCF methods of valuation because these
are based on a company's cash flows, which are far less easily manipulated through accounting treatments
than revenues or bottom-line earnings.

The DCF model formula in its mathematical form is presented below:

where CF1 is the estimated cash flow in year 1, CF2 is the estimated cash flow in year 2, and so on; TCF is the
terminal cash flow, or expected cash flow from the ending asset sale; r is the discount rate or required rate of
return; g is the anticipated growth rate of the cash flow; and n is the number of years covered in the model.

Applying the DCF Model

We can apply the DCF model to an example to demonstrate this methodology and how the formula works.
Calculate the value of Mayweather Inc. and its common stock based on the next six years of cash flow results.
Assume that the discount rate (required rate of return) is 8%, Mayweather's growth rate is 3%, and the
terminal value (TCF) will be two and one-half times the discounted value of the cash flow in year 6.
342 11 · Stocks and Stock Valuation

Mayweather has a cash flow of $2.0 million in year 1, so its discounted cash flow after one year (CF1) is
$1,851,851.85. We arrive at this amount by applying the discount rate of 8% for a one-year period to determine
the present value.

In subsequent years, Mayweather's cash flow will be increasing by 3%. These future cash flows also must be
discounted back to present values at an 8% rate, so the discounted cash flow amounts over the next six years
will be as follows:

                                                Year 1: $1,851,852

                                                Year 2: $1,766,118

                                                Year 3: $1,684,353

                                                Year 4: $1,606,374

                                                Year 5: $1,532,005

                                                Year 6: $1,461,079

Our earlier assumption that the terminal value will be 2.5 times the value in the sixth year gives us a total

terminal cash flow (TCF) of                     , or $3,652,697. Now, if we take all these future discounted cash

flows and add them together, we arrive at a grand total of $13,554,477. So, based on our DCF model analysis,

the total value of Mayweather Inc. is just over $13.5 million.

At this point, we have the estimated value of the entire company, but we need to work this down to the level of
per-share value of common stock.

Let's say that Mayweather is currently trading at $12 per share, and it has 1,000,000 common shares

outstanding. This tells us that the market capitalization of the company is       , or $12 million,

and that a $12 share price may be considered relatively low. The reason for this is that based on our DCF

model analysis, investors would theoretically be willing to pay $13,554,477 divided by 1,000,000 shares, or

$13.55 per share, for Mayweather. The overall conclusion would be that at $12.00 per share, Mayweather

common stock would be a good buy at the present time. Figure 11.11 shows the Excel spreadsheet approach

for arriving at the total value of Mayweather.

                                     Figure 11.11 Excel Solution for Total Value

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            11.4 · Preferred Stock 343

Cell E6 displays the present value formula that is active in cell D6.

Advantages and Limitations of the DCF Model

Due to several corporate accounting scandals in recent years, many analysts have given increasing credence to
the use of cash flow as a metric for determining accurate corporate valuations. However, it should be noted
that cash flow is not always the best means of measuring financial health. A company can always sell a large
portion of its assets to generate a positive cash flow, even if it is operating at a loss or experiencing other
financial difficulties. Additionally, investors prefer to see companies reinvesting their cash back into their
businesses rather than sitting on excessive balances of idle cash.

Similar to other models, the discounted cash flow model is only as good as the information entered. As the
common expression goes, "garbage in, garbage out." This can often be the case if reasonably accurate cash
flow estimates are not available or if an unrealistic discount rate or required rate of return is used in the
calculations. It is always best to use several different methods when valuing companies and their common
stock.

 LINK TO LEARNING

 Discounted Cash Flow

  Please view this short video on discounted cash flow (https://openstax.org/r/short_video_on_discounted)
  and how this method can be applied in stock valuation.

 11.4 Preferred Stock

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Define preferred stock.
  · Calculate the intrinsic value of preferred stock.
  · Understand the difference between common stock and preferred stock.

Features of Preferred Stock

Preferred stock is a unique form of equity sold by some firms that offers preferential claims in ownership.
Preferred stock will often feature a dividend that a company is obligated to pay out before it makes any
dividend payments to common stockholders. In cases of bankruptcy and liquidation of the issuing company,
preferred stockholders have priority claim to assets before common stockholders. Additionally, preferred
stockholders are usually entitled to a set (or constant) dividend every period.

Preferred stock carries a stated par value, but unlike bonds, they have no maturity date, and consequently,
there is no final payment of the par value. The only time a company would pay this par value to the
shareholder would be if the company ceased operations or retired the preferred stock. Many preferred stock
issues are cumulative in nature, meaning that if a company skips or is otherwise unable to pay a cash dividend,
it becomes a liability to the company and must eventually be paid out to preferred shareholders at some point
in the future. Other preferred stocks may be noncumulative, in which case if the company skips dividends, they
are forever lost to the shareholder.

The term preferred comes from preferred shareholders receiving all past (if cumulative) and present dividends
before common shareholders receive any cash dividends. In other words, preferred shareholders' dividend
claims are given preferential treatment over those of common shareholders. Preferred stock is usually a form
of permanent funding, but there are circumstances or covenants that could alter the payoff stream.
344 11 · Stocks and Stock Valuation

       For example, a company may convert preferred stock into common stock at a preset point in the future. It is
       not uncommon for companies to issue preferred stock that has a conversion feature. Such conversion features
       give preferred shareholders the right to convert to common shares after a predetermined period.
       A review of the characteristics of preferred stock will lead to the conclusion that the constant growth dividend
       model is an excellent approach for valuing such stock. Because shares of preferred stock provide a constant
       cash dividend based on original par value and the stated dividend rate, these may be considered a form of
       perpetuity.
       It is this constant, preferred dividend stream that makes preferred stock seem more like bonds or another
       form of debt than like stock. In addition, the constant dividend stream leads nicely to the pricing of preferred
       stock with the four dividend models we presented earlier in this chapter.

      Determining the Intrinsic Value of Preferred Stock

       We can apply a version of the present value of a perpetuity formula to value preferred stock, as in the
       following example. Oh-Well Heath Services Inc. has issued preferred stock that has a par value of $1,000 and
       pays an annual dividend rate of 5%. If the market considers the risk of Oh-Well to warrant a 10% discount rate,
       what would be a fair market price for Oh-Well preferred stock?
       First, we find the dividend value of Oh-Well:

       We then use the constant dividend model with infinite horizon because we have g equal to zero and n equal to
       infinity:

       We can also rearrange the formula to determine the required return on this stock, given its annual dividend
       and current price.

       THINK IT THROUGH
       Calculating the Return on Preferred Stock

         Data Forge Inc. has just issued preferred stock (cumulative) with a par value of $100.00 and an annual
         dividend rate of 7%. The preferred stock is currently selling for $35.00 per share. What is the yield or return
         on this preferred stock?
         Solution:
         The first step is to determine the annual dividend by multiplying the dividend rate by the par value:

         Now, using this $7.00 annual dividend, the $35.00 current price, and the equation above, we calculate the
         rate of return as follows:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 11.5 · Efficient Markets 345

We have introduced the concept of return here, which should be thought of as both the anticipated return for
the preferred stockholder and the company's cost of borrowing money for this particular type of capital.

Differences between Preferred and Common Stock

As we have discussed, preferred stock has important differences from common stock that apply to issuing
firms and to investors. Some of the most important of these differences are listed in Table 11.7.

Feature     Common Stock                                                       Preferred Stock
                                                      Highest priority, paid first
Dividends Paid only after preferred stockholders are  Predetermined rates, so constant dividend amounts
                 paid
                                                      Given preference in terms of payments, similar to
Dividends Variable and may increase or decrease       bonds
                                                      No
Growth     High potential but tied to company         If cumulative, unpaid dividends become liability that
           performance                                must be paid out eventually
                                                      Dividends paid even when company experiences
Liquidation Paid out last, after all creditors and    financial losses
                 preferred stockholders are paid

Voting Yes
Rights

Arrears No accrual of missed dividends

Certainty  Dividends potentially not paid if company
           earns no profits

Table 11.7 Differences between Common Stock and Preferred Stock

 11.5 Efficient Markets

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Understand what is meant by the term efficient markets.
  · Understand the term operational efficiency when referring to markets.
  · Understand the term informational efficiency when referring to markets.
  · Distinguish between strong, semi-strong, and weak levels of efficiency in markets.

Efficient Markets

For the public, the real concern when buying and selling of stock through the stock market is the question,
"How do I know if I'm getting the best available price for my transaction?" We might ask an even broader
question: Do these markets provide the best prices and the quickest possible execution of a trade? In other
words, we want to know whether markets are efficient. By efficient markets, we mean markets in which costs
are minimal and prices are current and fair to all traders. To answer our questions, we will look at two forms of
efficiency: operational efficiency and informational efficiency.

Operational Efficiency

Operational efficiency concerns the speed and accuracy of processing a buy or sell order at the best available
price. Through the years, the competitive nature of the market has promoted operational efficiency.

In the past, the NYSE (New York Stock Exchange) used a designated-order turnaround computer system
known as SuperDOT to manage orders. SuperDOT was designed to match buyers and sellers and execute
trades with confirmation to both parties in a matter of seconds, giving both buyers and sellers the best
346 11 · Stocks and Stock Valuation

       available prices. SuperDOT was replaced by a system known as the Super Display Book (SDBK) in 2009 and
       subsequently replaced by the Universal Trading Platform in 2012.
       NASDAQ used a process referred to as the small-order execution system (SOES) to process orders. The
       practice for registered dealers had been for SOES to publicly display all limit orders (orders awaiting execution
       at specified price), the best dealer quotes, and the best customer limit order sizes. The SOES system has now
       been largely phased out with the emergence of all-electronic trading that increased transaction speed at ever
       higher trading volumes.
       Public access to the best available prices promotes operational efficiency. This speed in matching buyers and
       sellers at the best available price is strong evidence that the stock markets are operationally efficient.

      Informational Efficiency

       A second measure of efficiency is informational efficiency, or how quickly a source reflects comprehensive
       information in the available trading prices. A price is efficient if the market has used all available information
       to set it, which implies that stocks always trade at their fair value (see Figure 11.12). If an investor does not
       receive the most current information, the prices are "stale"; therefore, they are at a trading disadvantage.

                           Figure 11.12 Forms of Market Efficiency A market is efficient if it provides all information that is available.

      Forms of Market Efficiency

       Financial economists have devised three forms of market efficiency from an information perspective: weak
       form, semi-strong form, and strong form. These three forms constitute the efficient market hypothesis.
       Believers in these three forms of efficient markets maintain, in varying degrees, that it is pointless to search
       for undervalued stocks, sell stocks at inflated prices, or predict market trends.
       In weak form efficient markets, current prices reflect the stock's price history and trading volume. It is useless
       to chart historical stock prices to predict future stock prices such that you can identify mispriced stocks and
       routinely outperform the market. In other words, technical analysis cannot beat the market. The market itself
       is the best technical analyst out there.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                               11 · Summary 347

     Summary

11.1 Multiple Approaches to Stock Valuation

This section introduced common stock and some of the models and calculation methods used by investors
and financial analysts to determine the prices or values of common shares. The most evaluative ratios that can
be computed from a company's financial statements include the price-to-earnings (P/E), price-to book (P/B),
price-to-sales (P/S), and price-to cash-flow (P/CF) ratios.

11.2 Dividend Discount Models (DDMs)

The dividend discount model, or DDM, is a method used to value a stock based on the concept that its worth is
the present value of all of its future dividends. The most common DDM is the Gordon growth model, which
values stock entirely on expected future dividends. Other techniques include the zero growth DDM, which
depends on fixed dividends; the constant growth DDM, which assumes that dividends will grow at a constant
rate; and the variable growth or nonconstant growth DDM, which is based on the assumption that stock value
will progress through different stages of growth. There is also the two-stage DDM, which is based on the
assumption of two stages of dividend growth: an initial period of higher growth and a subsequent period of
lower, more stable growth.

11.3 Discounted Cash Flow (DCF) Model

Investors buy stock to receive cash inflows at different points in the future. These inflows may come in the
form of dividends or a final cash inflow. If the investor chooses to wait for a final cash flow, the hope is that
capital gains will be even stronger. The DCF model is usually used to evaluate firms that are relatively young
and do not pay dividends to their shareholders. The DCF model focuses on a company's cash flows,
determining the present value of an entire organization using objective data and then working this down to
the share-value level based on total shares outstanding of the subject organization.

11.4 Preferred Stock

Preferred stock is a unique form of equity sold by some firms that offers preferential claims in ownership.
Preferred stock carries a stated par value, but unlike bonds, there is no maturity date, and consequently, there
is no final payment of the par value. The term preferred comes from preferred shareholders receiving all past
(if cumulative) and present dividends before common shareholders receive any cash dividends.

11.5 Efficient Markets

Efficient markets are markets in which costs are minimal and prices are current and fair to all traders. There
are two forms of efficiency: operational efficiency and informational efficiency. Operational efficiency concerns
the speed and accuracy of processing a buy or sell order at the best available price. Informational efficiency
concerns how quickly a source reflects comprehensive information in the available trading prices. Financial
economists have devised three forms of efficient markets from an information perspective: weak form, semi-
strong form, and strong form.

     Key Terms

amortization the process of spreading business costs in accounting; similar to depreciation, but differs in
    that it generally refers to intangible assets such as patents or copyrights

capital employed also known as funds employed; the total amount of capital used for the acquisition of
    profits by a firm or on a project

common stock a security that represents partial ownership of a corporation
comparable company analysis (comps) a method for valuating a company using the metrics of other

    businesses of similar size in the same industry
depreciation the process of spreading business costs in accounting; similar to amortization, but differs in
348 11 · Key Terms

    that it generally refers to fixed, tangible assets such as buildings, machinery, furniture, fixtures, and
    equipment
discounted cash flow (DCF) a method for estimating the value of an investment based on the present value
    of its expected future cash flows
dividend a sum of money paid regularly (typically quarterly) by a company to its shareholders out of its
    profits or reserves
dividend discount model (DDM) a quantitative method for predicting the price of a company's stock based
    on the theory that its present-day price is worth the sum of all of its future dividend payments when
    discounted back to their present value
dividend yield a financial ratio (dividend/price) that shows how much a company pays out in dividends each
    year relative to its stock price, expressed as a percentage
earnings per share (EPS) the ratio of a company's profits to the outstanding shares of its common stock;
    serves as an indicator of a company's profitability
EBIT short for earnings before interest and taxes; an indicator of a firm's profitability before the effects of
    interest or taxes; also referred to as operating earnings, operating profit, and profit before interest and tax
efficient markets markets in which costs are minimal and prices are current, fair, and reflective of all
    available relevant information
enterprise value (EV) a company's total value; often used as a more comprehensive alternative to equity
    market capitalization
enterprise value (EV) multiples also known as company value multiples; ratios used to determine the
    overall value of a company and, by extension, the value of its common stock
equity multiples metrics that calculate the expected or achieved total return on an initial investment
Gordon growth model a methodology used to determine the intrinsic value of a stock based on a future
    series of dividends that grow at a constant rate
growth rate the rate at which the dollar amount of dividends paid on a specific stock holding increases
intangible assets assets that are not physical in nature, such as goodwill, brand recognition, and intellectual
    property (i.e., patents, trademarks, and copyrights)
intrinsic value the value of a firm's stock based entirely on internal factors, such as products, management,
    and the strength of company brands in the marketplace
market capitalization the value of a company traded on the stock market, calculated by multiplying the
    total number of shares by the current share price
NASDAQ (National Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotations) short for National
    Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotations; an American stock exchange based in New York
    City, ranked second behind the New York Stock Exchange in terms of total market capitalization of shares
    traded
net book value also called net asset value (NAV); the total assets of a company minus its total liabilities
NYSE (New York Stock Exchange) the world's largest stock exchange by market capitalization of its listed
    companies, based in New York City; often referred to as the "Big Board"
perpetuity in terms of investments, an annuity with no end date
precedent transaction analysis (precedents) a method for valuating a company in which the price paid for
    similar companies in the past is considered an indicator of the company's current value
preferred stock stock that entitles the holder to a fixed dividend, the payment of which takes priority over
    payment of common stock dividends
price-to-book (P/B) ratio also called the market-to-book (M/B) ratio; a metric used to compare a company's
    market capitalization, or market value, to its book value
price-to-cash-flow (P/CF) ratio a stock valuation indicator or multiple that measures the value of a stock's
    price relative to its operating cash flow per share
price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio a ratio that indicates the dollar amount an investor can expect to invest in a
    company in order to receive one dollar of that company's earnings
price-to-sales (P/S) ratio a ratio that indicates how much investors are willing to pay for a company's stock

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          11 · CFA Institute 349

    per dollar of that company's sales
required return the minimum return an investor expects to achieve by investing in a project
secondary markets markets where investors buy and sell securities they already own
stock value also called intrinsic value; the fundamental, objective value of a share of stock

     CFA Institute

This chapter supports some of the Learning Outcome Statements (LOS) in this CFA® Level I Study Session
(https://openstax.org/r/CFA_Level_I_Study_Session). Reference with permission of CFA Institute.

     Multiple Choice

 1. The price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio is _______________.
      a. used to calculate a company's book value
      b. a multiplier used in enterprise valuation
       c. only applied when valuing preferred stock
      d. a metric for showing the expectations of the market

 2. The price-to-book (P/B) ratio is also called the _______________ ratio.
      a. market-to-book
      b. enterprise-to-book
       c. asset-to-price
      d. liability-to-book

 3. The two primary types of stock valuation multiples are _______________.
      a. enterprise value multiples and comparable company value multiples
      b. equity multiples and enterprise value multiples
       c. asset value multiples and liability value multiples
      d. None of the above

 4. Dividend yield is a form of equity multiple that is primarily used when _______________.
      a. the subject company is operating at a loss
      b. conducting comparisons between companies in different industries
       c. conducting comparisons between cash returns and investment types
      d. analyzing mature companies that have been paying dividends for several years

 5. Dividend yield is computed as the proportion of dividend per share to _______________.
      a. share price
      b. earnings per share
       c. market value per share
      d. book value per share

 6. Which of the following statements about enterprise value metrics is NOT true?
      a. EV to revenue can be used to assess companies with negative cash flows or firms that are currently
           experiencing financial losses.
      b. ROCE is a profitability ratio that measures the return on the equity in a company in comparison to its
           financing over a short period of time.
       c. EBIT allows investors to assess the core operations of the business without worrying about the costs
           of the capital structure.
      d. EBITDAR is a metric that is used in businesses that have substantial rental and least expenses.
350 11 · Review Questions

 7. If an investor's required rate of return increases and all other characteristics of a stock remain the same,
     the value of the stock will _______________.
      a. remain the same
      b. increase
       c. decrease
      d. None of the above

 8. A major limitation of the dividend discount model (DDM) is that _______________.
      a. it is extremely complicated to use
      b. it cannot be used with companies that do not pay dividends
       c. it must always be used in conjunction with another metric
      d. None of the above

 9. In which of the following ways does preferred stock differ from common stock?
      a. Preferred stock carries voting rights for its ownership.
      b. Preferred stock must be purchased through a broker dealer.
       c. Preferred stock may have a cumulative dividend feature.
      d. In the event of corporate liquidation, preferred stockholders are paid last.

10. The term efficient markets refers to the idea that _______________.
       a. publicly traded companies always file their financial reports on time
      b. investors are able to identify underpriced stocks for purchase
       c. stocks trade with minimal costs and prices are current and fair to all traders
      d. financial information on companies and their stock is only available to efficient traders

     Review Questions

 1. Briefly discuss one of the primary benefits of using comparative P/E ratios.
 2. Name an important characteristic of companies for which the price-to-book (P/B) ratio does not work well.
 3. Briefly describe the main type of scenario in which the two-stage DDM approach might be used to value a

     firm and its stock.
 4. Briefly describe a major shortcoming of the zero growth DDM model.
 5. Briefly describe the required inputs for the discounted cash flow (DCF) model.
 6. Briefly describe preferred stock and some of its ownership advantages compared to common stock.
 7. Briefly explain what is meant by the terms cumulative and noncumulative as they relate to preferred

     stocks.
 8. What were SuperDOT and SOES, and what were they designed to do?
 9. What are operational efficiency and informational efficiency, and how do they differ in terms of trading

     markets?
10. What is meant by informational efficiency, and how does it affect the price of a stock?

     Problems

 1. Today, Sysco Enterprises paid dividends on its common stock of $1.25 per share. If dividends per share are
     expected to increase to $3.50 per share six years from now, what is the percentage dividend growth rate?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         11 · Video Activity 351

 2. Let's say you want to purchase shares of Fontaine Ltd. and then hold this stock for six years. The company
     has a stated dividend policy of $2.00 annually per share for the next six years, at the end of which time you
     will sell the stock. You expect to be able to sell the stock for $35.00 at that time. If you want to earn an 8%
     return on this investment, what price should you pay today for this stock?

 3. Damian Painting Systems has established a dividend policy of $3.00 per share per year. If the company
     plans to be in business forever, what is the value of this stock if an investor wants a 10% return?

 4. Wilk Productions wants its shareholders to earn a 12% return on their investment in the company. At what
     value would Wilk stock be priced if the company paid $2.75 per share in constant annual dividends
     forever?

 5. Dax Industrial Systems has stock currently priced at $50.00 per share. If investors are earning a 7% return
     on Dax Industrial, what is the company's annual dividend payment per share?

 6. If a stock is selling at $400 with a current dividend of $40 and a potential investor's required rate of return
     is 15%, what would be the anticipated dividend growth rate?

 7. Mind Max Inc. has a dividend policy that increases annual dividends by 3% each year. If last year's
     dividend was $2.00, the company intends to stay in business for 50 years, and an investor wants a 9%
     return, what would be the price of Mind Max stock?

 8. Odon Corp. paid dividends today in the amount of $1.50 per share. If Odon will pay dividends of $5.00 10
     years from today, what is the annual dividend growth rate over this 10-year period?

 9. The Kirkson Distributors common stock is currently selling at $52.00 per share, pays dividends annually at
     $2.50 per share, and has an annual dividend growth rate of 2%. What is the required return?

10. If a preferred share of stock pays dividends of $2.50 per year and the required rate of return for the stock
      is 6%, what is its intrinsic value?

     Video Activity

Efficient Markets

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/Efficient_Markets)
 1. In the efficient market hypothesis (EMH), describe what is meant by the terms weak form efficiency, semi-

     strong form efficiency, and strong form efficiency. How do these forms of market efficiency differ from
     each other, and what are their characteristics?

 2. What is meant by the term random walk, and how does this concept relate to the EMH?

What Is Preferred Stock?

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/Preferred_Stock)
 3. Discuss the relative risks of the following financial instruments and how they compare to each other:

     bonds, common stocks, and preferred stocks. How and why will these three investment types typically
     carry different levels of risk to an investor?

 4. Discuss some of the important differences between preferred stocks and common stocks.
352 11 · Video Activity
Access for free at openstax.org
12 · Why It Matters                                                                                                                      353

12
              Historical Performance of US Markets

Figure 12.1 Stock markets are affected by many factors, such as interest rates, inflation, and politics. (credit: modification of "That
was supposed to be going up, wasn't it? by Rafael Matsunaga/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline

  12.1 Overview of US Financial Markets
  12.2 Historical Picture of Inflation
  12.3 Historical Picture of Returns to Bonds
  12.4 Historical Picture of Returns to Stocks

      Why It Matters

Author Mark Twain spoke for many when he wrote, "October--this is one of the peculiarly dangerous months
to speculate in stocks. The others are July, January, September, April, November, May, March, June, December,
August, and February." Twain's comment, though humorous, reflects the serious risks associated with
investing in the stock market. So why should we study the history of the US financial markets? Financial
experts regularly remind us that past performance is no guarantee of future results. However, past
performance can provide targets or benchmarks around which to build expectations. We can learn about the
past to prepare for future possibilities, or we can suffer what Winston Churchill warned, "Those that fail to
learn from history are doomed to repeat it."
Carlos Slim Helu, a Mexican businessman and the richest person in the world from 2010 to 2013, once said,
"With a good perspective on history, we can have a better understanding of the past and present, and thus a
clear vision of the future."1 In this chapter, we examine current and historical performance in money, bond,
and stock markets. Studying past market risk and return also allows investors to understand what is
reasonable and what is not.

1 Dan Western. "45 Carlos Slim Helu Quotes About Wealth and Success." Wealthy Gorilla. https://wealthygorilla.com/carlos-slim-
helu-quotes/
354 12 · Historical Performance of US Markets

      12.1 Overview of US Financial Markets

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Identify the various aspects of the US money markets.
         · Characterize government and corporate bond markets.
         · Detail the structure and operations of US equity markets.

      Money Markets

       The money market is a multitrillion-dollar market. Features of money market securities include being short-
       term (with maturities of less than one year) and very low risk (rarely failing to make their required payments).
       Further, money market securities are also liquid, which means that they trade easily without losing value.

       Financial institutions, corporations, and governments that have short-term borrowing and/or lending needs
       issue securities in the money market. Most of the transactions are quite large, with typical amounts of $10,000,
       $100,000, $1 million, or more. Money market securities are available in smaller amounts if you choose to invest
       in money market mutual funds (MMMFs) or certain types of exchange-traded funds (ETFs).

       Treasury bills (T-bills) are short-term debt instruments issued by the federal government. T-bills are
       auctioned weekly by the Treasury Department through the trading window of the Federal Reserve Bank of
       New York, with maturities of 4, 8, 13, or 26 weeks. The Treasury also auctions 52-week T-bills once every four
       weeks. The federal government uses T-bills to meet short-term liquidity needs. T-bills have very short
       maturities and a broad secondary market and are default-risk free. T-bills are also exempt from state and local
       income taxes. As a result, they carry some of the lowest effective interest rates on publicly traded debt
       securities.

       The volume of T-bills auctioned depends upon government borrowing needs. Much of the money raised at
       weekly T-bill auctions goes to repay the money borrowed 4, 8, 13, 26, or 52 weeks earlier. The gross amount of
       new T-bills issued in December 2020 was $1,591.1 billion, and the amount of T-bills retired in the same month
       was $1,570.6 billion, resulting in net new borrowing of "only" $20.5 billion.

       In addition to the regular auction of new T-bills, there is also an active secondary market where investors can
       trade used or previously issued T-bills. Since 2001, the average daily trading volume for T-bills has exceeded
       $75 billion.

       Commercial paper (CP) is a short-term, unsecured debt security issued by corporations and financial
       institutions to meet short-term financing needs such as inventory and receivables. For example, credit card
       companies use commercial paper to finance credit card payments. Commercial paper is a short-term debt
       instrument, with a typical maturity of 30 days and up to 270 days. The short maturity reduces US Securities and
       Exchange Commission (SEC) oversight. The lesser oversight and the unsecured nature of CP means that only
       highly rated firms are able to issue the uninsured paper.

       Commercial paper typically carries a minimum face value of $100,000 and sells at a discount, with the face
       value as the repayment amount. Corporations and financial institutions, not the government, issue CP; thus,
       returns are taxable. Further, unlike T-bills, there is not a robust secondary market for CP. Most purchasers are
       large, such as mutual fund investment companies, and they tend to hold commercial paper until maturity. The
       default rate on commercial paper is typically low, but default rates did increase into the double-digit range
       during the financial crisis of 2008.

       Negotiable certificates of deposit (NCDs) are very large CDs issued by financial institutions. They are
       redeemable only at maturity, but they can and often do trade prior to maturity in a broad secondary market.
       NCDs, or jumbo CDs, are so called because they sell in increments of $100,000 or more. However, typical
       amounts are $1 million, with a maturity of two weeks to six months.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               12.1 · Overview of US Financial Markets 355

NCDs differ in some important ways from the typical CD you may be familiar with from your local bank or
credit union. The typical CD has a maturity date, interest rate, and face amount and has FDIC insurance.
However, if an investor wishes to cash out prior to maturity, they will incur a substantial penalty from the
issuer (bank or credit union). An NCD also has a maturity date and amount, but it is much larger than a regular
CD and appeals to institutional investors. The principal is not insured. When the investor wishes to cash out
early, there is a robust secondary market for trading the NCD. The issuing institution can offer higher rates on
NCDs compared to CDs because it knows it will have use of the purchase amount for the entire maturity of the
NCD and because the reserve requirements on NCDs by the Federal Reserve is lower than for other types of
deposits.

Investment companies such as Vanguard and Fidelity, among many others, sell shares in money market
mutual funds (MMMFs). The investment company purchases money market instruments, such as T-bills, CP, or
NCDs; pools them; and then sells shares of ownership to investors (see Table 12.1). Generally, MMMFs invest
only in taxable securities, such as commercial paper and negotiable certificates of deposit, or only in tax-
exempt government securities, such as T-bills. Investors can then choose which type of short-term liquid
securities they would like to hold, taxable or nontaxable. MMMFs provide smaller firms and investors the
opportunity to participate in the money market by facilitating smaller individual investment amounts.

Financial Instrument Typical Maturity Minimum Amount           Issuer

Treasury bills  4-52 weeks  $10,000                            Federal government

Commercial paper 270 days   $100,000                           Businesses

Negotiable CDs  6 months    $100,000                           Financial institutions

MMMFs                                                          Investment companies

Federal funds   1 day       $1 million                         Financial institutions

Table 12.1 Money Market Instrument Characteristics (Selected)

The market for federal funds is notable because the Federal Reserve (Fed) targets the equilibrium interest rate
on federal funds as one of its most important monetary policy tools. The federal funds market traditionally
consists of the overnight borrowing and lending of immediately available funds among depository financial
institutions, notably domestic commercial banks. Financial institutions such as banks are required to keep a
fraction of their deposits on reserve with the Fed. When banks find they are short of reserves and immediately
need cash to meet reserve requirements, they can borrow directly from the Fed through the so-called
"discount window" or purchase excess reserves from other banks in the federal funds market. Often, the
maturity of a federal funds contract is as short as a single day or overnight. The participants in the market
negotiate the federal funds interest rate. However, the Federal Reserve effectively sets the target interest rate
range in the federal funds market by controlling the supply of funds available for use in the market.

Since the financial crisis of 2008, the activities and functioning of the federal funds market has changed. The
federal funds rate is still the rate targeted by the Fed for monetary policy, but the participants have evolved for
several reasons. The market now includes foreign banks and non-depository financial institutions, such as the
Federal Home Loan Banks. These institutions do not need to meet Fed reserve requirements and are not
required to keep reserves with the Fed. In addition, the Fed now pays interest to commercial banks for
reserves held at the Federal Reserve banks. Paying interest on reserves reduces the incentive for domestic
commercial banks to enter the federal funds market since they can already earn interest on their excess
reserves.
356 12 · Historical Performance of US Markets

       Daily trading volume in the federal funds market from 2016 through 2020 ranged from a high of $115 billion in
       March of 2018 to a low of only $34 billion on December 31, 2020.2 The volume of federal funds activity is lower
       in periods of slower economic growth because banks have fewer good opportunities to issue loans and are
       less likely to be short of required reserves.

      Bond Markets

       Bond markets are financial markets that make payments to investors for a specific period of time. Investors
       decide how much to pay for a bond depending on how much they expect inflation to affect the value of the
       fixed payment. There are several types of bonds: government bonds, corporate bonds, and municipal bonds.

       Government Bond Markets

       In the section on money markets, we discussed T-bills, and we now discuss longer-term government securities
       in the form of Treasury notes and Treasury bonds.

       We learned in Bonds and Bond Valuation that the federal government issues Treasury notes and bonds to
       raise money for current spending and to repay past borrowing. The size of the Treasury market is quite large,
       as the US federal government over the years has accumulated a total indebtedness of over $28 trillion dollars.
       The debt has grown so large we even have a real-time debt calculator online at https://www.usdebtclock.org/
       (https://openstax.org/r/usdebtclock).

       Treasury notes (T-notes) are US government debt instruments with maturities of 2, 3, 5, 7, or 10 years. The
       Treasury auctions notes on a regular basis, and investors may purchase new notes from TreasuryDirect.gov
       (https://openstax.org/r/treasurydirect.gov) in the same way they would a T-bill. T-notes differ from T-bills in
       that they are longer term and pay semiannual coupon interest payments, as well as the par or face value of
       the note at maturity. T-bills, as you will recall, sell at a discount and pay the face value at maturity with no
       explicit interest payments. Upon issue of a note, the size, number, and timing of note payments is fixed.
       However, prices do change in the secondary market as interest rates change. Like T-bills, T-notes are generally
       exempt from state and local taxes.

       Economists and investors keep a close eye on the 10-year T-note for several reasons. Mortgage lenders use it
       as a basis for setting and adjusting mortgage interest rates. In general, the rate on the 10-year T-note is a
       reliable market indicator of investor confidence.

       There is an active secondary market for Treasury notes. From 2001 to 2020, the daily trading volume for
       Treasury notes has averaged $395 billion, or roughly five times the daily trading volume of T-bills. Treasury
       notes are the largest single type of government debt instrument, with over $11 trillion outstanding. As you can
       see from Figure 12.2, the Treasury dramatically increased borrowing by issuing notes following the 2008
       financial crisis.

       Brokers, dealers, and investment companies provide secondary market opportunities for individual and
       institutional investors. Exchange-traded funds (ETFs) are popular investment vehicles for many types of
       government T-bill, T-note, and T-bond portfolios. An ETF is a basket of securities that can trade like stocks on a
       stock exchange. For example, IEI is an iShares ETF managed by BlackRock that invests in Treasury securities
       with three to seven years to maturity. When investors buy this ETF, they purchase a small bundle of Treasury
       notes that they can buy or sell, just as if they owned an individual share of stock. ETFs are a convenient way for
       investors to own broad portfolios of securities while still being able to trade the whole group in a single
       transaction if they choose.

        2 Federal Reserve Bank of New York. "Effective Federal Funds Rate." Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
        https://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/reference-rates/effr

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                 12.1 · Overview of US Financial Markets 357

                    Figure 12.2 Daily Trading Volume for US Treasury Notes and Bonds (data source: treasurydirect.gov)

Longer-term Treasury issues, Treasury bonds, have maturities of 20 or 30 years. T-bonds are like T-notes in
that they pay semiannual coupon interest payments for the life of the security and pay the face value at
maturity. They are longer term than notes and typically have higher coupon rates. T-bonds with maturities of
20 and 30 years are each auctioned only once per month. At the end of 2020, there were approximately $2.8
trillion of T-bonds outstanding, compared to approximately $11.1 trillion and $5 trillion of T-notes and T-bills.
In 1997, the Treasury began offering a new type of longer-term debt instrument, Treasury Inflation-Protected
Securities, or TIPS. TIPS currently have maturities of 5, 10, or 30 years and are auctioned by the Treasury once
per month. Like T-notes and T-bonds, they offer semiannual coupon interest payments for the life of the
security and pay face value at maturity. The coupon interest rates are fixed, but the principal value adjusts
monthly in response to changes in the consumer price index (CPI). Inflation and deflation cause the value of
the principal to increase or decrease, which results in a larger or smaller semiannual coupon payment. With a
total outstanding value of approximately $1.6 trillion at the end of 2020, TIPS are the smallest form of Treasury
borrowing we have discussed.3
State and local governments and taxing districts can issue debt in the form of municipal bonds (munis). Local
borrowing carries more risk than Treasury securities, and default or bankruptcy is atypical but possible. Thus,
munis have ratings that run a spectrum similar to corporate bonds in that they receive a bond rating based on
the perceived default risk. The defining feature of municipal bonds is that some interest payments are tax-
free. Interest on munis (municipal bonds) is always exempt from federal taxes and sometimes exempt from
state and local taxes. This makes them very attractive to investors in high income brackets.
There are two primary types of municipal bonds: revenue bonds and general obligation (GO) bonds. GO bonds
generate cash flows to repay the bonds by taxing a project. For instance, a local school district may tax
residents to pay for capital construction, or a city may tax citizens to pay for a new public works building.
Revenue bonds, on the other hand, may apply to projects that generate sufficient cash flows to repay the
bond--perhaps a utility or local toll road.
Corporate Bond Markets
Just as governments borrow money in the long-term from investors, so do corporations. A corporation often
uses bank loans, commercial paper, or supplier credit for short-term borrowing needs and issues bonds for
longer-term financing. Bond contracts identify very specific terms of agreement and outline the rules for the
order, timing, and amount of contractual payments, as well as processes for when one or more of the required
activities lapse. Indenture is the legal term for a bond contract. The indenture also includes limitations on the

3 Nick Lioudis. "Where Can I Buy Government Bonds?" Investopedia. December 30, 2020. https://www.investopedia.com/ask/
answers/where-can-i-buy-government-bonds/; TreasuryDirect. "Today's Auction Results." TreasuryDirect.
https://www.treasurydirect.gov/instit/annceresult/press/press_auctionresults.htm
358 12 · Historical Performance of US Markets

corporation for how they may use the bond proceeds.

A bond indenture includes both standard boilerplate contract language and specific conditions unique to a
particular issue. Because of these non-standardized features of a bond contract, the secondary market for
trading used bonds typically requires a broker, dealer, or investment company to facilitate a trade.

When a corporation uses a real asset, such as property or buildings, to guarantee a bond, the firm has issued a
mortgage bond. However, it is more common for a corporation to issue an unsecured bond known as a
debenture. The risk of a debenture reflects the risk of the entire corporation and does not rely on the value of
a specific underlying asset, as is the case with a mortgage bond.

The risk a bondholder bears for buying a bond depends in part on the terms of the bond indenture, market
conditions over the life of the bond contract, and the ability or inability of the firm to generate sufficient cash
flows to meet its bond obligations. Fortunately, investors do not have to make these determinations about risk
on their own. They can rely on bond rating services such as Moody's, Standard and Poor's, or Fitch to generate
evaluations of the creditworthiness of bond issuers.

Ratings firms must adhere to rigorous standards when evaluating client creditworthiness. For example,
Standard and Poor's begins the explanation of its evaluation process with these paragraphs:

"S&P Global Ratings provides a Credit Rating only when, in its opinion, there is information of satisfactory
quality to form a credible opinion on creditworthiness, consistent with its Quality of the Rating Process -
Sufficient Information (Quality of Information) Policy, and only after applicable quantitative, qualitative, and
legal analyses are performed. Throughout the ratings and surveillance process, the analytical team reviews
information from both public and nonpublic sources."

"For corporate, government, and financial services company or entity (collectively referred to as "C&G" Credit
Ratings), the analysis generally includes historical and projected financial information, industry and/or
economic data, peer comparisons, and details on planned financings. In addition, the analysis is based on
qualitative factors, such as the institutional or governance framework, the financial strategy of the rated entity
and, generally, the experience and credibility of management."4

Table 12.2 is a summary of how the three major credit rating agencies identify their ratings. Bond ratings are
important for many reasons. The higher a firm's rating, the lower the expected default risk and the lower the
cost of borrowing for the firm. Pension funds may be restricted to investing in only medium- or higher-grade
bonds. This could limit the number of investors who can participate in the market for lower-grade bonds,
thereby reducing the liquidity, price, and tradability of those debt securities.

There are only two US companies with AAA credit ratings: Microsoft and Johnson & Johnson.5 Over the past 40
years, there has been a steady decline of AAA-rated companies (from sixty in 1980). Many institutions have
found that this rating requires a more conservative approach to debt that can inhibit growth and revenue. So,
in today's market, credit ratings have begun to lose their importance. It seems that the ability to pay debts has
become secondary to the potential for growth.

                                 Fitch Moody's S&P Bond Grade/Risk

                                 AAA Aaa AAA Investment/low risk

                                 AA Aa AA Investment/low risk

                                 A             A  A Investment/low risk

                                 Table 12.2 Credit Scale Ratings from the Three Credit
                                 Rating Agencies

4 S&P Global Ratings. "Transparency Statement." S&P Global Ratings. https://www.spglobal.com/ratings/en/about/transparency
5 The Wall Street Insider. "Why Only Two Companies Are Left with the AAA Rating." The Wall Street Insider. June 12, 2020.
https://www.thewallstreetinsider.com/trends/why-only-two-companies-are-left-with-the-aaa-rating

Access for free at openstax.org
                                   12.1 · Overview of US Financial Markets 359

Fitch Moody's S&P Bond Grade/Risk

BBB Baa BBB Investment/medium risk

BB Ba BB Junk/high risk

B  B  B Junk/high risk

CCC Caa CCC Junk/highest risk

Table 12.2 Credit Scale Ratings from the Three Credit
Rating Agencies

Equity Markets

An important goal of firm managers is to maximize owners' wealth. For corporations, shares of stock
represent ownership. A corporation could have 100 shares, one million shares, or even several billion shares of
stock. Stocks are difficult to value compared to bonds. Bonds typically provide periodic interest payments and
a principal payment at maturity. The bond indenture specifies the timing and the amount of payments. Stocks
might have periodic dividend payments, and an investor can plan to sell the stock at some point in the future.
However, no contract guarantees the size of the dividends or the time and resale price of the stock. Thus, the
cash flows from stock ownership are more uncertain and risky.

Corporations are the dominant form of business enterprise in the United States because of the ability to raise
capital, the ease of transfer of ownership, and the benefit of limited liability to the owners. There are generally
two types of stock, preferred and common. Preferred stock is a hybrid between common stock and bonds.
Preferred stock has a higher claim to cash flows than common stockholders have (thus the term preferred),
but it is lower than that of bondholders. In addition, preferred stock has fixed cash flows as bonds have and
typically has no or few voting rights. Preferred stock dividends are after-tax payments by the corporation, as
are common stock dividends, but bond interest payments, paid prior to taxes, are tax-deductible for firms. Of
the three, preferred stock is the least used form of capital financing for corporations.

Common stockholders are the residual claimants and owners of the corporation. After all others who have a
claim against the firm are paid, the common stockholders own all that remains. Common stockholders have
voting rights, typically one vote per share, and choose the board of directors.

One popular way to rank the size of companies is to determine the value of their market capitalization, or
market cap. Market cap is equal to the current stock price multiplied by the number of shares outstanding.
According to the World Bank, the total market cap of US firms at the end of 2020 was $50.8 trillion, making up
over half of the world's total value of equity, estimated at $90 trillion.6 The largest US company at that time
was Apple, followed by Microsoft, Amazon, Alphabet (Google), and Facebook. The largest company by sales
volume in 2020 was Walmart.7

Geographical Location of Exchanges

Ownership is easily transferable for stocks that trade in one of the organized stock exchanges or in an over-
the-counter (OTC) market. Definitions of a stock exchange and an OTC market blur as financial markets quickly
adapt to innovations. However, stock markets have a centralized trading location, transactions require a
broker to connect buyers and sellers, and the exchanges guarantee a basic level of liquidity so that investors
are always able to buy or sell their stocks. An OTC market is an electronic market conducted on computer
screens and consists of direct transactions among buyers and sellers, with no broker to bring the two

6 Siblis Research. "Total Market Value of US Stock Market." Siblis Research. https://siblisresearch.com/data/us-stock-market-value/;
The World Bank. "Market Capitalization of Listed Domestic Companies (current US$)." The World Bank. https://data.worldbank.org/
indicator/CM.MKT.LCAP.CD
7 Companies Market Cap. "Largest American Companies by Market Capitalization." Companies Market Cap.
https://companiesmarketcap.com/usa/largest-companies-in-the-usa-by-market-cap/; National Retail Federation. "Top 100 Retailers
2020 List." National Retail Federation. 2020. https://nrf.com/resources/top-retailers/top-100-retailers/top-100-retailers-2020-list
360 12 · Historical Performance of US Markets

       together. Because there is no formal exchange present, it is possible that investors will have trouble finding
       buyers or sellers for their stocks.
       Most of the trading consists of used or previously issued stocks in over-the-counter markets and organized
       exchanges. The two largest stock exchanges in the world, as measured by the market capitalization of the
       companies listed on the exchange, are the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) and the NASDAQ. Both exchanges
       are located in the United States. Other large stock exchanges are located in Japan, China, Hong Kong,
       continental Europe, London, and Saudi Arabia.
       Process of Offering Equities
       The primary market is the market for new securities, and the secondary market is the market for used
       securities. When issuing new equity, the issuing firm receives the proceeds of the sale. Having an active
       secondary market makes it easier for corporations to issue stock, as investors know they can resell if desired.
       Most of the trading of equity securities is for used securities on the secondary market.
       An initial public offering, or IPO, occurs when a firm offers stock to the public for the first time. With a typical
       IPO, a private company decides to raise capital and go public with the help of an investment banker. The
       investment banker agrees to provide financial advice, recommend the price and number of shares to issue,
       and establish a syndicate of underwriters to finance and ultimately distribute the new shares to investors (see
       Figure 12.3). An IPO is expensive for the issuing firm, and it can expect to incur costs of 5% to 8% or more of
       the value of the IPO. As of the end of 2020, the largest successful IPO belongs to Saudi Aramco, a petroleum
       company, valued at $25.6 billion at issue in December 2019.8 The Ant Group had planned an IPO valued at
       over $34 billion dollars in 2020, but as of the end of 2020 that issue was put on hold by the Chinese
       government.9
       Institutional and preferred individual investors are typically the initial purchasers of IPOs. Smaller investors
       rarely have the opportunity to purchase. However, any investor can buy the new shares once available for
       public trading. Investment author and financial expert Professor Burton Malkiel cautions that buying IPOs
       immediately after issue can be a money-losing investment. He cites research showing that, historically, IPOs
       have underperformed the market by an average of 4% per year.10
       Another way for a corporation to raise capital in the equity market is through a seasoned equity offering
       (SEO). An IPO occurs when a firm transitions from a private to a public company. An SEO takes place when a
       corporation that is already publicly traded issues additional shares of stock to the public. An SEO is often part
       of a SEC Rule 415 offering, or so-called shelf registration. Shelf registrations allow a company to register with
       the SEC to issue new shares but wait up to two years before issuing the shares. This gives companies the
       ability to register their intent to issue new shares and to "set them on the shelf" until market conditions are
       most favorable for issuance to the public.

        8 Jennifer Rudden. "Largest IPOs Worldwide as of January 21, 2021." Statista. 2021. https://www.statista.com/statistics/269343/
        worlds-largest-ipos/
        9 Deborah D'Souza. "Ant Group Set to Be World's Largest IPO Ever." Investopedia. October 27, 2020.
        https://www.investopedia.com/ant-group-set-to-be-world-s-largest-ipo-ever-5084457; Jasper Jolly. "Ant Group Forced to Suspend
        Biggest Share Offering in History." The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/business/2020/nov/03/biggest-share-offering-in-
        history-on-hold-as-ant-group-suspends-launch
        10 Burton Malkiel. A Random Walk down Wall Street. 10th ed. W. W. Norton, 2012.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                 12.1 · Overview of US Financial Markets 361

                                                                         Figure 12.3 The IPO Process

Alternative Methods of Raising Capital
Special purpose acquisition companies (SPACs) were born in the 1990s and came of age in 2019.11 SPACs
are a special form of IPO. We know that firms with products or services to sell and a documented operational
and financial history often initiate an IPO to raise money by going public. A SPAC, however, is like an IPO that
puts the cart before the horse. By this, we mean that rather than having a company ready to go public to raise
capital, with a SPAC, a sponsor raises capital in anticipation of finding a firm ready to go public. This is why we
sometimes refer to SPACs as "blank check" companies. Investors are providing capital to a firm that has no
assets with the expectation that the sponsor will find a good investment.
Forming a SPAC shifts the risk and expenses associated with a firm going public. Because the money raised by
the SPAC sponsor is the only asset, the process of filing with the SEC is less complicated, less expensive, and
less time-consuming than filing an IPO. Often, when formed, a SPAC has a target company in mind, but this is
not a requirement. Once the SPAC identifies a target firm, the sponsor can negotiate a purchase price and
essentially merge with the target. Underpricing of IPOs is well documented,12 and the owners of a private
company going public do not capture the significant increase in stock price that frequently occurs in the
months following an IPO.
A SPAC offering allows the private firm owners to negotiate for a better price. A July 2020 study from
Renaissance Capital reports that "of 223 SPAC IPOs conducted from the start of 2015 through July 2020, 89
have completed mergers and taken a company public." According to the study, of those 89 mergers, "the
common shares have delivered an average loss of 18.8% and a median return of minus 36.1%. That compares
with the average after-market return from traditional IPOs of 37.2%" over the same time period.13

Sequence of Trade Execution
Investors who wish to trade stocks (buy or sell) execute trades via a broker. Many online brokers today will
execute your trades at low to no cost once you have established a brokerage account. When trading, it is most

11 Nicholas Jasinksi. "Blank Check Companies Are Hot on Wall Street. Investors Can't Ignore Them." Barron's. January 17, 2020.
https://www.barrons.com/articles/boom-in-blank-check-companies-or-spacs-what-investors-need-to-know-51579299261; Julie
Young. "Special Purpose Acquisition Company (SPAC)." Investopedia. November 24, 2020. https://www.investopedia.com/terms/s/
spac.asp
12 R. G. Ibbotson, J. L. Sindelar, and J. R. Ritter. "The Market's Problems with the Pricing of Initial Public Offerings." Journal of
Applied Corporate Finance 7 (Spring 1994).
13 Ciara Linnane. "2020 Is the Year of the SPAC--Yet Traditional IPOs Offer Better Returns, Report Finds." MarketWatch. September
16, 2020. https://www.marketwatch.com/story/2020-is-the-year-of-the-spac-yet-traditional-ipos-offer-better-returns-report-
finds-2020-09-04; Barron's. "What Is a SPAC?" Barron's (video). December 11, 2020. https://www.barrons.com/video/what-is-a-spac/
86E80342-FBC2-44DA-99E2-DF808CD147FF.html
362 12 · Historical Performance of US Markets

       common to make a market order or a limit order. A market order executes a trade at the current price, while a
       limit order specifies the price at which the investor is willing to buy or sell. Figure 12.4 provides a visual
       representation of how payment for an order flow works.

12.2                                     Figure 12.4 The Order of Payments for Trade Executions

      Historical Picture of Inflation

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Define inflation with concrete examples.
  · Describe the practical impact of inflation on consumption and salary.
  · Explain how expected and actual inflation are measured.
  · Detail the behavior of inflation over various historical periods.

Over time, returns in the stock market have easily outperformed returns in the bond market. However, not
everyone is comfortable investing in stocks. Taking a more informed and opposing view, financial economist
Jeremy Siegel queries, "You have never lost money in stocks over any 20-year period, but you have wiped out
half your portfolio in bonds (after inflation). So which is the riskier asset?"14 Siegel brings up a valid point
about inflation. Returns adjusted for changes in prices provide a better measure of value or wealth. Baseball
pundit Sam Ewing noted, "Inflation is when you pay fifteen dollars for the ten-dollar haircut you used to get
for five dollars when you had hair."15 If what you have earned on your investments fails to keep up with
changing prices, you may have a larger portfolio with less purchasing power.

Expected versus Actual Inflation

Inflation occurs when things cost more and your money buys less today than it did yesterday. It is
understandable to dislike inflation and to be concerned over the prospect of rising prices. In fact, two of the
primary policy objectives of the Federal Reserve are to work for price stability and moderate interest rates.
However, is inflation necessarily good or bad? In practice, inflation can benefit some people and harm others
at the same time. Consider the impact of differences in expected and actual realized inflation. Empirical
evidence suggests that, on average, economists do a good job of developing inflation rate forecasts that
match the actual rate of inflation. Estimated inflation is built into the interest rates investors require or are
willing to pay for financial products, such as fixed-rate loans or bonds. When the actual rate of inflation
exceeds the estimated rate on a product, such as a mortgage loan, this means borrowers are repaying the
loan with less-valuable dollars and benefit from the increased inflation rate. Lenders, however, receive those
inflation-impacted dollars and are harmed due to their unexpected decrease in purchasing power.

Deflation, or falling prices, is associated with economic recessions or even depressions and is thought to be an
even more serious problem than inflation. Generally, policy makers tend to support moderate inflation, being
careful to stay away from zero or negative price changes.

14 Jeremy J. Siegel. Stocks for the Long Run: The Definitive Guide to Financial Market Returns & Long-Term Investment Strategies.
McGraw-Hill, 2002. First published 1994.
15 Sam Ewing. "Sam Ewing Quotes." Brainy Quotes. https://www.brainyquote.com/authors/sam-ewing-quotes

Access for free at openstax.org
                                           12.2 · Historical Picture of Inflation 363

Inflation Impacts

Ultimately, inflation redistributes wealth. Lenders providing fixed-rate loans receive less-valuable dollars in
return. Borrowers repay with those same less-valuable dollars. Workers receive less-valuable dollars, especially
when their wage increases lag behind changes in prices. Modest inflation can benefit a consumer-driven
economy like the United States if consumers are motivated to spend money before prices increase. However,
too much inflation can cause frenzied buying, drive prices even higher, and outpace the rate of wage
increases. Higher inflation raises the rates on new borrowing instruments and can slow the rate of business
investment and economic growth. Inflation raises overall prices and may cause hardship for consumers on a
fixed income.

Finally, inflation does not have an equal impact on all goods and services. As Table 12.3 shows, consumer
prices did not increase at the same rate for the selected items shown. From 1980 to 2020, inflation, as
measured by the consumer price index (CPI), grew at an average annual rate of 2.90%. However, the price of
college tuition and fees increased at more than double that rate. Rent, another large expense for most college
students, increased at an annual rate of 3.67%, also well above the average increase in the CPI. The price
increases for ground beef and butter were slightly less than the CPI average. For the selected items presented
here, only the average price for used cars and trucks rose at a rate significantly lower than the average rate of
inflation.

        Year          1980 2000 2020 Annual Change

College tuition and fees 70.8 331.9 877.3  6.49%

Rent                  80.9 183.9 341.5     3.67%

Used cars and trucks  62.3 155.8 144.2     2.12%

Ground beef           104.6 125.2 296.2    2.64%

Butter                89.4 135.9 248.7     2.59%

CPI (1982 to 1984 = 100) 82.4 172.2 258.8  2.90%

Table 12.3 Changing Consumer Price Levels--Selected Goods (source:
US Bureau of Labor Statistics, Consumer Price Index)

Using Graphs and Charts to Plot Inflation Behavior

The CPI is a measure of how prices have changed for a basket of goods across the United States. Figure 12.5
shows the eight major categories of expenditures included in the CPI.16 Different regions of the country and
population subgroups may experience different rates of inflation. Retired people may spend a greater portion
of their income on healthcare than someone in their twenties.17 Residents on the East and West Coasts spend
a higher percentage of their earnings on housing than those living in the Midwest.18 As such, there are several
different measures of inflation based on geographic region or other factors.19 It is worth noting that a basket
of goods and services that cost $100 in 1984 would cost approximately $260 by the end of 2020, an increase of
160% (see Figure 12.6)! Over that same period, the average annual rate of inflation as measured by the CPI
was 2.55%. These numbers make it easy to see that even a relatively modest annual inflation rate, lower than
the long-run annual US inflation rate of 3%, results in significant price increases.

16 US Bureau of Labor Statistics. "Consumer Price Index." US Bureau of Labor Statistics. https://www.bls.gov/cpi/
17 Chris Farrell. "The Truth About Health Care Costs in Retirement." Forbes. June 28, 2018. https://www.forbes.com/sites/
nextavenue/2018/06/28/the-truth-about-health-care-costs-in-retirement/
18 US Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office of Policy Development and Research. "Rental Burdens: Rethinking
Affordability Measures." PD&R Edge. September 22, 2014. https://www.huduser.gov/portal/pdredge/
pdr_edge_featd_article_092214.html
19 Khan Academy. "How Changes in the Cost of Living Are Measured." Khan Academy. https://www.khanacademy.org/economics-
finance-domain/macroeconomics/macro-economic-indicators-and-the-business-cycle/macro-price-indices-and-inflation/a/how-
changes-in-the-cost-of-living-are-measured-cnx
364 12 · Historical Performance of US Markets
                                                               Figure 12.5 The Market Basket Categories of the CPI

                        Figure 12.6 United States Consumer Price Index (CPI) 1984-2020 (data source: US Bureau of Labor Statistics)
        Access for free at openstax.org
                         12.2 · Historical Picture of Inflation 365

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Profile of Janet Yellen

Figure 12.7 Janet Yellen (credit: "Janet Yellen Official Federal Reserve Portrait." United States Federal Reserve/Wikimedia
Commons, Public Domain)

Janet Yellen has led a life of firsts. After graduating as valedictorian of her high school class, Yellen later
attended Yale University and was the only woman in her 1971 PhD graduating class in economics. Men have
long dominated the "dismal science" of economics, but Yellen has proved to be an exception.

Motivated by an undergraduate economics professor at Pembroke College of Brown University, Yellen
realized how much the US central bank, known as the Federal Reserve, could influence the lives of ordinary
people. She changed her major to economics, and the rest, as they say, is history.

In her first stint working with the Federal Reserve in 1977, Yellen met and married George Ackerlof. Ackerlof
would go on to win a Nobel Prize in Economics. Ackerlof and Yellen eventually established themselves as
faculty members at the University of California, Berkeley. Yellen was twice named Outstanding Teacher in
the Haas School of Business and was recognized for her award-winning research.

In 1993, Yellen began her second tour at the Federal Reserve as an appointed member of the Board of
Governors. She left this position in 1997 to head President Bill Clinton's Council of Economic Advisers. Yellen
became just the second woman to head the presidential council.

She then returned to California and the Bay Area, eventually becoming president of the Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco from 2004 to 2010. Later that year she became the vice chair of the Federal Reserve.
Four years later, in 2014, Yellen assumed leadership as the first woman chair of the Federal Reserve System.

As Fed chair, Yellen earned an enviable record. During her four-year tenure, the rate of unemployment
decreased by more than 2.5%, and employment increased in every month of her term. This is the first and
only time in the history of the Federal Reserve that the board chair has overseen continuous increases in
366 12 · Historical Performance of US Markets

         employment over their entire tenure.
         Now, another first: In 2021, President Joe Biden appointed Yellen as the first woman Secretary of the
         Treasury. Yellen has a storied career and a long list of accomplishments, but surely her record of firsts will
         prove to be an important and lasting legacy for women in business, government, and economics
         everywhere.
         (Sources: Ann Saphir. "Factbox: Janet Yellen's Road to US Treasury Secretary." Reuters. November 24, 2020.
         https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSKBN2832WS; Ylan Q. Mui. "New Fed Chief Janet Yellen Lets a Long
         Career of Breaking Barriers Speak for Itself." Washington Post. February 2, 2014.
         https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/economy/new-fed-chief-janet-yellen-has-long-history-of-
         breaking-barriers/2014/02/02/9e8965ca-876d-11e3-833c-33098f9e5267_story.html; Stephanie Grace.
         "Banker to the Nation." Brown Alumni Magazine. October 30, 2013.
         https://www.brownalumnimagazine.com/articles/2013-10-30/banker-to-the-nation)

      12.3 Historical Picture of Returns to Bonds

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Detail the behavior of sovereign (government) bonds over various historical periods.
         · Detail the behavior of corporate bonds over various historical periods.
         · Extract sovereign and corporate bond investment results from plots and charts.

      Federal Government Bond Behavior, Discussion, Charts, and Graphs

       United States Treasury (sovereign) bonds are among the safest investments available. In fact, T-bonds often
       serve as the proxy for a risk-free investment in financial modeling. However, even though T-bonds may be
       essentially default-risk free, they do change value as interest rates change. Look at Figure 12.8, showing
       annual T-bond returns from 1980 to 1999. None of these bonds defaulted, yet investors realized very different
       returns on their investments from year to year. The total returns reflect interest payments plus the change in
       price because of changes in interest rates.
       The late 1970s experienced high rates of inflation and interest rates. As those rates began to fall in late 1981,
       bond prices rose. Investors holding T-bond portfolios realized very large returns on their risk-free investments
       in 1982. That year provided the highest annual return in the 20-year period, with an annual return of 32.81%.
       The lowest annual return was in 1999, as the Federal Reserve began to raise rates to temper an overheating
       stock market caused by dot-com speculation gaining momentum. When the Fed raised interest rates, the
       prices on existing bonds fell, and investors realized a -8.25% return on their bond portfolios. Thus, the range in
       returns on these "low risk" investment securities was over 41% from the highest to the lowest annual return in
       this particular two-decade span. Overall, the average annual return on T-bonds from 1980 to 1999 was a robust
       10.21%, boosted in part by the above average annual inflation rate of 4.28%.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                           12.3 · Historical Picture of Returns to Bonds 367

                          Figure 12.8 Treasury Bond Performance, 1980-1999 (data source: Aswath Damodaran Online)

Inflation slowed from 2000 to 2020, and the average annual rate of return on T-bonds fell accordingly (see
Figure 12.9). With reduced variability of interest rates in the new century and interest rates in general being
lower, the returns on bond portfolios were also lower on average. T-bonds in the first two decades of the
twenty-first century averaged an annual return of 5.77%, very close to the long-run average return in the
previous century. The range of returns was also smaller than the previous two decades, with the highest
annual return topping out at 20.10% in 2008 and the lower end dipping down to -11.12% in 2009 as the Fed
made a significant effort to reduce interest rates in an attempt to stimulate the economy following the Great
Recession.

Corporate Bond Behavior, Discussion, Charts, and Graphs

The performance of Baa bonds is very similar to T-Bonds over the four decades spanning 1980 to 2020 (see
Figure 12.10). These bonds are not default-risk free and require a risk premium for investors. The average
annual return of 12.07% from 1980 to 1999 topped T-bonds by 1.86%. The margin was greater in the period
from 2000 to 2020 (see Figure 12.11), with Baa bonds (mid-tier corporate bonds) realizing an average annual
premium of 2.30% over the default-risk free T-bonds.
These premiums translate to a substantial increase in investment performance. For example, had an investor
placed $100 into a T-bond portfolio in 1980, the value of the investment would have been $1,931 by year-end
2020. This would have easily outpaced the rate of inflation but significantly lagged the ending value of $4,506
on a similar Baa bond portfolio investment (see Figure 12.12).
368 12 · Historical Performance of US Markets

                                   Figure 12.9 Treasury Bond Performance, 2000-2020 (data source: Aswath Damodaran Online)

                                      Figure 12.10 Baa Bond Performance, 1980-1999 (data source: Aswath Damodaran Online)
                                      Figure 12.11 Baa Bond Performance, 2000-2020 (data source: Aswath Damodaran Online)
        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                         12.3 · Historical Picture of Returns to Bonds 369

              Figure 12.12 Baa Bonds versus T-Bonds Performance, 1980-2020 (data source: Aswath Damodaran Online)

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Profile of Bill Gross

Bill Gross may be the most successful fixed-income investor ever, but he is also a prime example of the
application of the efficient market theory. In over 40 years of investing in bonds and other types of fixed-
income securities worldwide, Bill Gross earned his moniker "the bond king."
In 1971, Gross cofounded and began his long tenure as managing director and chief investment officer of
Pacific Investment Management Company, better known as Pimco. Gross was not yet 30 years old, but he
had already graduated from college, served in the Navy in Vietnam, and even briefly worked as a
professional blackjack player in Las Vegas to bankroll the cost of his MBA from UCLA.
Gross helped change the definition of success for bond investors by focusing on total returns, including
price changes, rather than simply bond yields. He used mathematical modeling and invested worldwide
and in different types of bond markets seeking risk-adjusted returns. Gross made active rather than passive
management of bond funds a successful investment strategy. In the process, he changed how mangers
oversee fixed-income portfolios today.
Pimco grew into an investment powerhouse under Gross's direction, eventually managing over $1.5 trillion
dollars in assets. During the financial crisis of 2008, Gross served as an adviser to the US Treasury.
Morningstar named him "fixed income fund manager of the decade" in 2010. In addition, Gross profited
from his investment prowess, amassing a fortune in excess of $2 billion.
Gross's investment strategy was to carefully analyze the known factors about debt instruments and pair
that analysis with the unknown future. He was uncanny in his ability to estimate future prices, interest
rates, and macroeconomic conditions to make profitable investments.
However, as efficient markets would posit, the odds began to catch up with Gross in the latter part of his
investing career. After leaving Pimco in 2014, Gross was unable to match his earlier performance successes
and failed to beat bond fund performance averages. Much of Gross's investment strategy allowed him to
look for bond returns by investing in any type of bond, with any maturity, in any country, and in any
location. For decades, he was right more often than wrong in his investment choices. However, statistically,
370 12 · Historical Performance of US Markets

         his approach to investing suggested that, unless he could see the future, at some point his expectations
         would be incorrect. Perhaps Gross's greatest competition comes from a generation of investment
         managers who learned and improved upon his proven strategies. He retired as an active public fund
         manager in 2019.

         Today, Gross continues to manage his personal fortune, as well as the assets in his family charitable
         foundation. Gross and the foundation have donated over $800 million to several causes over the last two
         decades. In 2020, Gross joined Bill Gates, Warren Buffett, and hundreds of other billionaires in signing the
         Giving Pledge, whose signees promise to donate over 50% of their wealth during their lifetime and/or upon
         their death.

         (Sources: Mary Childs. "Bill Gross Made the Bond Market What It Is Today." Barron's. February 8, 2019.
         https://www.barrons.com/articles/bill-gross-bond-market-investing-legacy-51549669974; Jeff Sommer.
         "Once the `Bond King,' Bill Gross Is Retiring, His Star Dimmed." New York Times. February 4, 2019.
         https://www.nytimes.com/2019/02/04/business/bond-king-bill-gross-retirement.html; CNN. "Bill Gross Fast
         Facts." CNN. March 31, 2021. https://www.cnn.com/2013/04/08/us/bill-gross-fast-facts/)

      12.4 Historical Picture of Returns to Stocks

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Explain overall equity market behavior over various historical periods.
         · Explain different equity style and size behavior over various historical periods.
         · Extract various equity market performance results from plots and charts.

      Using Graphs and Charts to Plot Equity Market Behavior Stock Size Considerations

       The Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA), also known as the Dow 30) and the S&P 500 Index are the most
       frequently quoted stock market indices among scholars, businesses, and the public in general. Both indices
       track the change in value of a group of large capitalization stocks. The changes in the two indices are highly
       correlated.

       It may be fair to question if either index is a good representation of the value of equity and the changes in
       value in the market because there are over 6,000 publicly traded companies listed on organized exchanges
       and thousands of additional companies that trade only over the counter. As of year-end 2020, the S&P 500
       firms had a combined market capitalization of $33.4 trillion, about 66% of the estimated US equity market
       capitalization of $50.8 trillion.20 It is widely agreed that the performance of the S&P 500 is a good
       representation of the broader market and more specifically of large capitalization firms.

       Figure 12.13 provides a visualization of how S&P 500 stock returns have stacked up since 1900. This figure
       makes it clear that equity returns roughly follow a bell curve, or normal distribution. Thus, we are able to
       measure risk with standard deviation. A lower standard deviation of returns suggests less uncertainty of
       returns and therefore less risk.

       Capital market history demonstrates that the average return to stocks has significantly outperformed other
       financial security classes, such as government bonds, corporate bonds, or the money market. Table 12.4
       provides the return and standard deviation of several US investment classes over the 40-year period
       1981-2020. As you can see, stocks outperformed bonds, bills, and inflation. This has led many investment
       advisers to emphasize asset allocation first and individual security selection second. The intuition is that the

        20 Spencer Israel. "The Number of Companies Publicly Traded in the US Is Shrinking--Or Is It?" MarketWatch. October 30, 2020.
        https://www.marketwatch.com/story/the-number-of-companies-publicly-traded-in-the-us-is-shrinkingor-is-it-2020-10-30; Siblis
        Research. "Total Market Value of US Stock Market." Siblis Research. https://siblisresearch.com/data/us-stock-market-value/

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                           12.4 · Historical Picture of Returns to Stocks 371

decision to invest in stocks rather than bonds has a greater long-run payoff than the change in performance
resulting from the selection of any individual or group of stocks.
Figure 12.14 demonstrates the growth of a $100 investment at the start of 1928. Note that the value of the
large company portfolio is more than 50 times greater than the equal investment in long-term US government
bonds. This supports the importance of thoughtful asset allocation.
Still, the size of a firm has a significant impact on how investors choose equity securities. Capital market
history also shows that a portfolio of small company stocks has realized larger average annual returns, as well
as greater variability, than a portfolio of large companies as represented by the S&P 500. Small-cap stock total
returns ranged from a high of 142.9% in 1933 to a low of -58.0% in 1937.
More recently, the differential return between small and large capital stocks has not been as pronounced.
From 1980 through 2020, the Wilshire US Small-Cap Index has averaged an annual compound return of 12.13%
compared to the Wilshire US Large Cap Index average of 11.82% over the same period. The 31-basis point
premium is much smaller than that realized in the 1926-2019 period, which saw a small-cap average annual
compounded return of 11.90% versus 10.14% for the large-cap portfolio.

Figure 12.13 The Pyramid of Equity Returns: Distribution of Annual Returns for the S&P 500 Index, 1928-2020 (data source:
Aswath Damodaran Online)
372 12 · Historical Performance of US Markets

                                               Nominal Average Standard Deviation

Asset Class                                    Annual Returns  of Returns

                                               1981-2020       1981-2020

Large company stocks                           12.64%          16.06%

Baa bonds                                      10.34%          7.67%

10-year T-bonds                                8.21%           9.92%

US T-bills                                     3.94%           3.39%

Inflation                                      2.93%           1.76%

Table 12.4 Arithmetic Average Annual Returns and Standard Deviation by
Asset Class, 1981-2020 (source: Aswatch Damodaran Online)

  Figure 12.14 Growth of a $100 Investment into Selected Asset Portfolios, 1928-2020 (data source: Aswath Damodaran Online)

 LINK TO LEARNING
 Would You Like to Research More Historical Returns?

  This article on historical returns and risks (https://openstax.org/r/6-what-to-invest-in) contains calculators
  that can help you find returns over your selected periods for US stocks, bonds, and inflation. How have the
  markets done since you were born? This second article about global equity markets (https://openstax.org/
  r/returns-of-global-stocks) has a comparable calculator. You can also go to the Global Wealth Report
  (https://openstax.org/r/global-wealth-report), an annual publication by Credit Suisse, to dig more deeply.

 LINK TO LEARNING
 Does It Pay to Time the Market?

  Over the period 1980 to mid-2020, an investment of $10,000 into an S&P 500 index fund would have yielded
  the investor $697,421. However, missing the 5 best-performing days in the market would have reduced the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                        12.4 · Historical Picture of Returns to Stocks 373

final portfolio balance to $432,411. Stay out of the market on the 10 best days, and the balance would have
ended at only $313,377, or less than half of the return earned in the full time period. Watch this Wall Street
Journal (https://openstax.org/r/wall-street-journal-video) video on the DJIA to learn more.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Warren Buffett

Figure 12.15 Warren Buffett (credit: "Warren Buffet at the 2015 Select USA Investment Summit." USA International Trade
Administration/Wikimedia Commons, CC Public Domain Mark)

Warren Buffett has not always been one of the richest people in the world, but he has always been one of
the hardest workers. An entrepreneur from an early age, Buffett's yearbook photo caption noted that he
"likes math: a future stockbroker." Before leaving high school, Buffett had already earned thousands of
dollars running a paper route and through one of his start-up businesses of installing and maintaining
pinball machines in barbershops.
As they say in Nebraska, "you need to make hay while the sun shines," and Buffett has made his share of
hay, so to speak. In his career, Buffett has accumulated enough hay to be one of the wealthiest people in
the world, with a net worth of over $80 billion by the end of 2020.
The "Oracle of Omaha," as Buffett is known, grew his fortune through investing partnerships and most
notably as the chairman, president, CEO, and largest stockholder of Berkshire Hathaway (BRK). Berkshire
Hathaway was a New England textile manufacturer when Buffett and his investment partners began buying
shares in the 1960s. By 1966, after a dispute with the then CEO of Berkshire, Buffett assumed control of the
company and fired the CEO. Soon, Buffett's partnerships merged into Berkshire and moved the business
away from textiles; it eventually became the largest financial services company in the world, including total
ownership of the Geico Insurance Company.
Buffett's career is notable for how he developed his fortune, how he explained his philosophy, and for his
current and future plans. Buffett followed the method of Benjamin Graham, famous value investor and
author of Security Analysis, The Intelligent Investor. However, Buffett expanded beyond Graham's analysis
374 12 · Historical Performance of US Markets

         of financial statements and intrinsic value to examine the character of executive management. He applied
         the same criteria to hiring employees as well. Buffett once noted, "We look for three things when we hire
         people. We look for intelligence, we look for initiative or energy, and we look for integrity. And if they don't
         have the latter, the first two will kill you, because if you're going to get someone without integrity, you want
         them lazy and dumb." When speaking of integrity, Buffett went on to say, "Only when the tide goes out do
         you discover who's been swimming naked."

         Buffett's folksy way of making his point will undoubtedly be another of his legacies. When asked repeatedly
         about how he managed to be such a successful investor, Buffett replied, "Never invest in a business you
         can't understand." Never was this truer than in the late 1990s and 2000, when the dot-com craze fueled the
         stock market with technology firms enjoying tremendous price increases without the corresponding
         earnings. Buffett's value investing lagged until the bubble burst, and suddenly he was back on top. When
         asked about his change in fortune he replied, "In the business world, the rearview mirror is always clearer
         than the windshield."

         Buffett believes in long-term rather than short-term investing. He once remarked that "Someone's sitting in
         the shade today because someone planted a tree a long time ago" and "If you aren't willing to own a stock
         for 10 years, don't even think about owning it for 10 minutes."

         The third aspect of Buffett's legacy will be how his money works now and after he is gone. With Bill and
         Melinda Gates, Buffett started the Giving Pledge, and to date they have gathered the pledge of over 200
         billionaires to give away half or more of their fortune during and after their lifetimes. Buffett states, "If
         you're in the luckiest 1% of humanity, you owe it to the rest of humanity to think about the other 99%."
         Buffett has begun the process to give away most of his fortune, but he has left this pearl of wisdom for his
         own children: "A very rich person should leave his kids enough to do anything, but not enough to do
         nothing."

         (Sources: Joshua Kennon. "How Warren Buffett Became One of the Wealthiest People in America." The
         Balance. May 4, 2021. https://www.thebalance.com/warren-Buffett-timeline-356439; Ty Haqqi. "Five Largest
         Financial Services Companies in the World." Insider Monkey. November 26, 2020.
         https://www.insidermonkey.com/blog/5-largest-financial-services-companies-in-the-world-891348/2/;
         Mohit Oberoi. "Warren Buffett: Growth Stocks Look Like Dot-Com Bubble." Market Realist. September 4,
         2020. https://marketrealist.com/2020/07/warren-buffett-growth-stocks-like-dot-com-bubble/)

       LINK TO LEARNING

       Does It Pay to Invest Globally?

         On a global basis, US equity markets have been among the highest performing since 1900. Only Australia
         shows a higher average annual return over the 121-year period. Many factors contribute to long-run stock
         performance in any given country. However, over the period studied, the United States benefited from an
         entrepreneurial spirit and distance from the center of two world wars. An article reviewing global stock
         market returns from 1900 to 2020 summarizes and analyzes global market return information created by
         researchers Elroy Dimson, Paul Marsh, and Mike Staunton for Credit Suisse.21

         While most established economies have not generated higher returns than the US equity markets, they do
         offer the benefits of diversification. Further, the greatest return potential--and the greatest risk of

        21 Karl Steiner. "Historical Returns of Global Stocks." Mindfully Investing. July 6, 2020. https://www.mindfullyinvesting.com/
        historical-returns-of-global-stocks/; Elroy Dimson, Paul Marsh, and Mike Staunton. Summary Edition Credit Suisse Global Investment
        Returns Yearbook 2020. Credit Suisse, February 2020. https://www.credit-suisse.com/media/assets/corporate/docs/about-us/
        research/publications/credit-suisse-global-investment-returns-yearbook-2020-summary-edition.pdf

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                        12.4 · Historical Picture of Returns to Stocks 375

loss--may lie in developing economies. Investing experts are not in complete agreement about the
advantages and disadvantages of investing in foreign equity markets. This article provides a framework for
analysis and tools (https://openstax.org/r/returns-of-global-stocks) for comparing equity returns by
country from 1970 through 2020. Has Australia continued to be the top-performing equity market since
1970? Have equity markets performed as well or better in the last 21 years compared to the 121-year
period? Does the article encourage you to diversify internationally or focus only on domestic securities?
376 12 · Summary

     Summary

12.1 Overview of US Financial Markets

One way to parse financial markets is by the maturity of financial instruments. With this dichotomy, we
explored the money market and the capital market. The money market consists of short-term securities and
the capital market of longer-term securities. The capital market discussion focused on debt and equity as
financial instruments used to finance longer-term capital financing needs. IPOs or SPACs are vehicles for
raising new equity. Most trading on organized exchanges or over-the-counter markets is for used, or
secondary, securities.

12.2 Historical Picture of Inflation

The Federal Reserve considers moderate inflation rates optimal in their oversight of the US economy. We
measure inflation by comparing the price of a bundle or basket of goods over time and documenting how
prices change. Since not everyone consumes similar baskets of goods, we calculate several different measures
of inflation. The most commonly quoted measure of inflation uses changes in the Consumer Price Index (CPI).

12.3 Historical Picture of Returns to Bonds

Historical bond yields are published going back hundreds of years but are only reliably available for the last
100 years or so. In large part, the returns realized on portfolios of bonds have been smaller and less variable
than the returns realized for equities.

12.4 Historical Picture of Returns to Stocks

Stocks have produced the greatest average annual rates of return of the money and capital market assets
discussed in this chapter. Stockholders bear more risk than bondholders or money market investors and
receive on average higher average annual returns. Despite the relatively high average annual rate of return for
portfolios of stock, history shows that the equity markets earn negative annual returns about 25% of the time.
The negative returns realized by equities occur far more often than the negative results realized by money
market or debt market instruments.

     Key Terms

bond returns sums the periodic interest payments and the change in bond price in a given period and
    divides by the bond price at the beginning of the period

commercial paper (CP) a short-term, unsecured security issued by corporations and financial institutions to
    meet short-term financing needs such as inventory and receivables

debenture a common type of unsecured bond issued by a corporation
indenture legal term for a bond contract
inflation a general increase in prices and a reduction in purchasing power; expected rate is a key component

    of interest rates
initial public offering (IPO) the first time a firm offers stock to the public
mortgage bond bond issued by a corporation using a real asset, such as property or buildings, to guarantee

    it
municipal bonds (munis) bonds issued by a local government, territory, or agency; generally used to

    finance infrastructure projects
negotiable certificates of deposit (NCDs) large CDs issued by financial institutions; redeemable at maturity

    but can trade prior to maturity in a broad secondary market
primary market market for new securities
seasoned equity offering (SEO) a method used by new IPOs to raise capital by offering additional shares of

    stock to the public
secondary market market for used securities

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                      12 · Multiple Choice 377

shelf registration part of Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) Rule 415; allows a company to register
    with the SEC to issue new shares but allows up to two years before issuing the shares

special purpose acquisition companies (SPACs) a special form of IPO
stock returns sums the periodic dividend payments plus the change in stock price in a given period divided

    by the stock price at the beginning of the period
total returns the sum of all cash flows received from an investment; includes periodic cash flows plus price

    appreciation or price depreciation
Treasury bills (T-bills) short-term debt instruments issued by the federal government and maturing in a

    year or less
Treasury bonds government debt instruments with maturities of 20 or 30 years
Treasury notes (T-notes) government debt instruments with maturities of 2, 3, 5, 7, or 10 years

     Multiple Choice

 1. Which of the following statements about Treasury bills is false?
      a. T-bills sell at a discount from face value and pay the face value at maturity.
      b. T-bills have maturities of 2, 3, 5, 7, or 10 years.
       c. T-bill auctions take place weekly.
      d. T-bill denominations are relatively small compared to other money market instruments, with initial
           auction sizes of as little as $10,000 per T-bill.

 2. If an investor wishes to simply execute a stock trade at the current market price, they should issue a
      ________.
      a. limit order
      b. stop loss order
       c. market order
      d. hedge order

 3. Based on nominal average annual returns over the period 1980-2020, list the order of returns by asset
     class from highest to lowest.
      a. large company stocks, Baa bonds, small company stocks, T-bills
      b. small company stocks, large company stocks, Baa bonds, T-bills
       c. T-bills, Baa bonds, small company stocks, large company stocks
      d. small company stocks, large company stocks, T-bills, Baa bonds

 4. A $1 investment in a portfolio of small company stocks in 1928 would have grown to over ________ by
     mid-2019.
      a. $35,000
      b. $8,000
       c. $800
      d. $80

 5. Since 1980, the compound average annual growth rate for large company stocks has been ________.
      a. greater than Baa bonds but less than small company stocks
      b. greater than small company stocks but less than Baa bonds
       c. greater than Baa bonds and small company stocks
      d. less than Baa bonds and small company stocks
378 12 · Review Questions

     Review Questions

 1. Define the competitive and noncompetitive bid process for US Treasury bills.
 2. How does a negotiable certificate of deposit (NCD) differ from the typical certificate of deposit you may

     see advertised by your local bank?
 3. If you are an investor concerned about unexpected inflation in the coming years which of the following

     investments offers the greatest protection against inflation, and why: T-notes, T-bonds, or TIPS?
 4. Debentures are more common than mortgage bonds issued by corporations. Why do you think

     debentures are more popular with investors? Be sure to define each bond contract in your discussion.
 5. Market capitalization is a common way to rank firm size. Search the internet to identify and define at least

     two other ways to rank firms based on size. Identify at least one reason you prefer market capitalization as
     the method of choice to rank firm size.
 6. Compare and contrast an SEO, IPO, and SPAC. If Ford Motor Company wished to raise new equity capital,
     which of these vehicles would they use?
 7. Compared to a "best efforts" form of underwriting, how does "firm commitment" underwriting transfer
     risk from the issuing firm to the underwriter?
 8. How would a decrease in inflation affect the interest rate on an adjustable-rate debenture?
 9. If inflation unexpectedly rises by 3%, would a corporation that had recently borrowed money by issuing
     fixed-rate bonds to pay for a new investment benefit or lose?
10. If wages on average rise at least as fast as inflation, why do people worry about how inflation affects
      incomes?
11. Identify at least one item that you use regularly whose price has changed significantly.
12. What has been the average annual rate of inflation between 1985 and 2020? What is the long-run average
      annual rate of inflation over the last century?
13. Between 1985 and 2020, what year had the lowest realized annual rate of inflation in the United States?
      Why do you think inflation was so low in this particular year?
14. Go to https://www.usinflationcalculator.com/ (https://openstax.org/r/usinflationcalculator). How much
      money would it take today to purchase what one dollar would have bought in 1950, in 1975, and in your
      birth year?
15. Are US Treasury bonds truly risk free?
16. At the end of 2020 and the beginning of 2021, coupon rates on long-term T-notes and T-bonds were near
      historic lows. Further, the federal government was running a historically large budget deficit in an effort to
      stimulate an economy battered by COVID-19 and to support millions of unemployed workers. Some
      investment advisers warned that this could be a particularly bad time to invest in government bonds or
      bonds in general. Why?
17. Which group of securities earned a higher average annual return from 2000 to 2020, T-bonds or Baa
      bonds? Why do think this was so?
18. Which earned a higher average annual return, a portfolio of T-bonds from 1980 to 2000 or from 2000 to
      2020? Why do think this was so?
19. Why is standard deviation of returns a reasonable measure of risk for a portfolio of equity securities?
20. Many popular-press articles claim that growth investing is "clearly better" than value investing or that

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         12 · Video Activity 379

      value investing is "dead." How would you respond to proponents of growth investing after observing
      Figure 12.15?

21. Over the last 120 years, few countries have achieved the realized rate of returns enjoyed by US equity
      markets. Does this mean investors should ignore international investments and focus only on domestic
      markets in an effort to maximize returns?

     Video Activity

How Private Companies Are Bypassing the IPO Process

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/blank-check-companies)
 1. Can you identify three apparent advantages and three disadvantages for investors in a SPAC (special

     purpose acquisition company) versus a traditional IPO process?

 2. The video concludes with a question about whether SPACs are a current fad doomed to fade away or a
     new and growing method of publicly financing firms. What do you think? Search for information related to
     SPACs and proposals for SPAC regulation, and report your conclusion.

A Secret Meeting and the Birth of the Federal Reserve

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/the-birth-of-the-federal)
 3. How can an institution like the United State Federal Reserve System prevent bank runs?

 4. After the passage of the Federal Reserve Act in 1913 (https://openstax.org/r/federal-reserve-act), the
     United States has suffered through three great global financial crises: the Great Depression of the 1930s,
     the Great Recession of 2007-2009 (https://openstax.org/r/the-worlds-most-devastating), and the
     COVID-19 pandemic of 2020-2021 (https://openstax.org/r/tracking-the-covid-19-recessions-effects).
     Research one of the latter two crises, and identify and discuss some of the tools used by the Fed to lessen
     the length and economic severity of the economic hardships. In what ways has this research project
     supported or changed your opinion about the United States having the Federal Reserve System?
380 12 · Video Activity
Access for free at openstax.org
13 · Why It Matters                                                                                                                    381

13
              Statistical Analysis in Finance

Figure 13.1 Graphical displays are used extensively in the finance field. (credit: modification of "Analysing target market" by Marco
Verch/flickr CC BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline

  13.1 Measures of Center
  13.2 Measures of Spread
  13.3 Measures of Position
  13.4 Statistical Distributions
  13.5 Probability Distributions
  13.6 Data Visualization and Graphical Displays
  13.7 The R Statistical Analysis Tool

      Why It Matters

Statistical analysis is used extensively in finance, with applications ranging from consumer concerns such as
credit scores, retirement planning, and insurance to business concerns such as assessing stock market
volatility and predicting inflation rates. As a consumer, you will make many financial decisions throughout your
life, and many of these decisions will be guided by statistical analysis. For example, what is the probability that
interest rates will rise over the next year, and how will that affect your decision on whether to refinance a
mortgage? In your retirement planning, how should the investment mix be allocated among stocks and bonds
to minimize volatility and ensure a high probability for a secure retirement? When running a business, how
can statistical quality control methods be used to maintain high quality levels and minimize waste? Should a
business make use of consumer focus groups or customer surveys to obtain business intelligence data to
improve service levels? These questions and more can benefit from the use and application of statistical
methods.

Running a business and tracking its finances is a complex process. From day-to-day activities such as
managing inventory levels to longer-range activities such as developing new products or expanding a
customer base, statistical methods are a key to business success. For finance considerations, a business must
manage risk versus return and optimize investments to ensure shareholder value. Business managers employ
a wide range of statistical processes and tools to accomplish these goals. Increasingly, companies are also
382 13 · Statistical Analysis in Finance

       interested in data analytics to optimize the value gleaned from business- and consumer-related data, and
       statistical analysis forms the core of such analytics.

      13.1 Measures of Center

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Calculate various measures of the average of a data set, such as mean, median, mode, and geometric
             mean.
         · Recognize when a certain measure of center is more appropriate to use, such as weighted mean.
         · Distinguish among arithmetic mean, geometric mean, and weighted mean.

      Arithmetic Mean

       The average of a data set is a way of describing location. The most widely used measures of the center of a
       data set are the mean (average), median, and mode. The arithmetic mean is the most common measure of the
       average. We will discuss the geometric mean later.

       Note that the words mean and average are often used interchangeably. The substitution of one word for the
       other is common practice. The technical term is arithmetic mean, and average technically refers only to a
       center location. Formally, the arithmetic mean is called the first moment of the distribution by
       mathematicians. However, in practice among non-statisticians, average is commonly accepted as a synonym
       for arithmetic mean.

       To calculate the arithmetic mean value of 50 stock portfolios, add the 50 portfolio dollar values together and
       divide the sum by 50. To calculate the arithmetic mean for a set of numbers, add the numbers together and
       then divide by the number of data values.

       In statistical analysis, you will encounter two types of data sets: sample data and population data. Population
       data represents all the outcomes or measurements that are of interest. Sample data represents outcomes or
       measurements collected from a subset, or part, of the population of interest.

       The notation is used to indicate the sample mean, where the arithmetic mean is calculated based on data
       taken from a sample. The notation is used to denote the sum of the data values, and is used to indicate
       the number of data values in the sample, also known as the sample size.

       The sample mean can be calculated using the following formula:

Finance professionals often rely on averages of Treasury bill auction amounts to determine their value. Table
13.1 lists the Treasury bill auction amounts for a sample of auctions from December 2020.

                                 Maturity Amount ($Billions)

                                 4-week T-bills   $32.9

                                 8-week T-bills   38.4

                                 13-week T-bills  63.1

                                 26-week T-bills  59.6

                                 52-week T-bills  39.7

                                 Total            $233.7

                                 Table 13.1 United States Treasury Bill
                                 Auctions, December 22 and 24, 2020
                                 (source: Treasury Direct)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                       13.1 · Measures of Center 383

To calculate the arithmetic mean of the amount paid for Treasury bills at auction, in billions of dollars, we use
the following formula:

Median

To determine the median of a data set, order the data from smallest to largest, and then find the middle value
in the ordered data set. For example, to find the median value of 50 portfolios, find the number that splits the
data into two equal parts. The portfolio values owned by 25 people will be below the median, and 25 people
will have portfolio values above the median. The median is generally a better measure of the average when
there are extreme values or outliers in the data set.

An outlier or extreme value is a data value that is significantly different from the other data values in a data
set. The median is preferred when outliers are present because the median is not affected by the numerical
values of the outliers.

The ordered data set from Table 13.1 appears as follows:

The middle value in this ordered data set is the third data value, which is 39.7. Thus, the median is $39.7 billion.

You can quickly find the location of the median by using the expression        . The variable n represents the

total number of data values in the sample. If n is an odd number, the median is the middle value of the data

values when ordered from smallest to largest. If n is an even number, the median is equal to the two middle

values of the ordered data values added together and divided by 2. In the example from Table 13.1, there are

five data values, so n = 5. To identify the position of the median, calculate  , which is  , or 3. This

indicates that the median is located in the third data position, which corresponds to the value 39.7.

As mentioned earlier, when outliers are present in a data set, the mean can be nonrepresentative of the center
of the data set, and the median will provide a better measure of center. The following Think It Through
example illustrates this point.

THINK IT THROUGH

Finding the Measure of Center

Suppose that in a small village of 50 people, one person earns a salary of $5 million per year, and the other
49 individuals each earn $30,000. Which is the better measure of center: the mean or the median?
Solution:
The mean, in dollars, would be arrived at mathematically as follows:

However, the median would be $30,000. There are 49 people who earn $30,000 and one person who earns
$5,000,000.

The median is a better measure of the "average" than the mean because 49 of the values are $30,000 and
one is $5,000,000. The $5,000,000 is an outlier. The $30,000 gives us a better sense of the middle of the data
set.
384 13 · Statistical Analysis in Finance

      Mode

       Another measure of center is the mode. The mode is the most frequent value. There can be more than one
       mode in a data set as long as those values have the same frequency and that frequency is the highest. A data
       set with two modes is called bimodal. For example, assume that the weekly closing stock price for a technology
       stock, in dollars, is recorded for 20 consecutive weeks as follows:

       To find the mode, determine the most frequent score, which is 72. It occurs five times. Thus, the mode of this
       data set is 72. It is helpful to know that the most common closing price of this particular stock over the past 20
       weeks has been $72.00.

      Geometric Mean

       The arithmetic mean, median, and mode are all measures of the center of a data set, or the average. They are
       all, in their own way, trying to measure the common point within the data--that which is "normal." In the case
       of the arithmetic mean, this is accomplished by finding the value from which all points are equal linear
       distances. We can imagine that all the data values are combined through addition and then distributed back to
       each data point in equal amounts.
       The geometric mean redistributes not the sum of the values but their product. It is calculated by multiplying
       all the individual values and then redistributing them in equal portions such that the total product remains the
       same. This can be seen from the formula for the geometric mean, x (pronounced x-tilde):

       The geometric mean is relevant in economics and finance for dealing with growth--of markets, in investments,
       and so on. For an example of a finance application, assume we would like to know the equivalent percentage
       growth rate over a five-year period, given the yearly growth rates for the investment.
       For a five-year period, the annual rate of return for a certificate of deposit (CD) investment is as follows:
       3.21%, 2.79%, 1.88%, 1.42%, 1.17%. Find the single percentage growth rate that is equivalent to these five
       annual consecutive rates of return. The geometric mean of these five rates of return will provide the solution.
       To calculate the geometric mean for these values (which must all be positive), first multiply1 the rates of return
       together--after adding 1 to the decimal equivalent of each interest rate--and then take the nth root of the
       product. We are interested in calculating the equivalent overall rate of return for the yearly rates of return,
       which can be expressed as 1.0321, 1.0279, 1.0188, 1.0142, and 1.0117:

       Based on the geometric mean, the equivalent annual rate of return for this time period is 2.09%.

       LINK TO LEARNING

       Arithmetic versus Geometric Means

         In this video on arithmetic versus geometric means (https://openstax.org/r/arithmetic-versus-geometric),
         the returns of the S&P 500 are tracked using an arithmetic mean versus a geometric mean, and the
         difference between these two measurements is discussed.

      Weighted Mean

       A weighted mean is a measure of the center, or average, of a data set where each data value is assigned a
       corresponding weight. A common financial application of a weighted mean is in determining the average price

        1 In this chapter, the interpunct dot will be used to indicate the multiplication operation in formulas.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                   13.2 · Measures of Spread 385

per share for a certain stock when the stock has been purchased at different points in time and at different
share prices.

To calculate a weighted mean, create a table with the data values in one column and the weights in a second
column. Then create a third column in which each data value is multiplied by each weight on a row-by-row
basis. Then, the weighted mean is calculated as the sum of the results from the third column divided by the
sum of the weights.

THINK IT THROUGH

Calculating the Weighted Mean

Assume your portfolio contains 1,000 shares of XYZ Corporation, purchased on three different dates, as
shown in Table 13.2. Calculate the weighted mean of the purchase price for the 1,000 shares.

Date Purchased Purchase Price ($) Number of Shares Purchased Price ($) Times
                                                                                                  Number of Shares

January 17                     78           200    15,600

February 10                    122          300    36,600

March 23                       131          500    65,500

Total                          NA           1,000  117,700

Table 13.2 1,000 Shares of XYZ Corporation

Solution:

In this example, the purchase price is weighted by the number of shares. The sum of the third column is
$117,700, and sum of the weights is 1,000. The weighted mean is calculated as $117,700 divided by 1,000,
which is $117.70.

Thus, the average cost per share for the 1,000 shares of XYZ Corporation is $117.70.

 13.2 Measures of Spread

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Define and calculate standard deviation for a data set.
  · Define and calculate variance for a data set.
  · Explain the relationship between standard deviation and variance.

Standard Deviation

An important characteristic of any set of data is the variation in the data. In some data sets, the data values are
concentrated close to the mean; in other data sets, the data values are more widely spread out. For example,
an investor might examine the yearly returns for Stock A, which are 1%, 2%, -1%, 0%, and 3%, and compare
them to the yearly returns for Stock B, which are -9%, 2%, 15%, -5%, and 0%.

Notice that Stock B exhibits more volatility in yearly returns than Stock A. The investor may want to quantify
this variation in order to make the best investment decisions for a particular investment objective.

The most common measure of variation, or spread, is standard deviation. The standard deviation of a data
set is a measure of how far the data values are from their mean. A standard deviation

  · provides a numerical measure of the overall amount of variation in a data set; and
386 13 · Statistical Analysis in Finance

         · can be used to determine whether a particular data value is close to or far from the mean.

       The standard deviation provides a measure of the overall variation in a data set. The standard deviation is
       always positive or zero. It is small when the data values are all concentrated close to the mean, exhibiting little
       variation or spread. It is larger when the data values are more spread out from the mean, exhibiting more
       variation.

       Suppose that we are studying the variability of two different stocks, Stock A and Stock B. The average stock
       price for both stocks is $5. For Stock A, the standard deviation of the stock price is 2, whereas the standard
       deviation for Stock B is 4. Because Stock B has a higher standard deviation, we know that there is more
       variation in the stock price for Stock B than in the price for Stock A.

       There are two different formulas for calculating standard deviation. Which formula to use depends on whether
       the data represents a sample or a population. The notation s is used to represent the sample standard
       deviation, and the notation is used to represent the population standard deviation. In the formulas shown
       below, x is the sample mean, is the population mean, n is the sample size, and N is the population size.

       Formula for the sample standard deviation:

Formula for the population standard deviation:

Variance

Variance also provides a measure of the spread of data values. The variance of a data set measures the extent
to which each data value differs from the mean. The more the individual data values differ from the mean, the
larger the variance. Both the standard deviation and the variance provide similar information.

In a finance application, variance can be used to determine the volatility of an investment and therefore to
help guide financial decisions. For example, a more cautious investor might opt for investments with low
volatility.

Similar to standard deviation, the formula used to calculate variance also depends on whether the data is
collected from a sample or a population. The notation is used to represent the sample variance, and the
notation 2 is used to represent the population variance.

Formula for the sample variance:

Formula for the population variance:

This is the method to calculate standard deviation and variance for a sample:

1. First, find the mean of the data set by adding the data values and dividing the sum by the number of

data values.

2. Set up a table with three columns, and in the first column, list the data values in the data set.

3. For each row, subtract the mean from the data value  , and enter the difference in the second

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        13.2 · Measures of Spread 387

column. Note that the values in this column may be positive or negative. The sum of the values in this

column will be zero.

4. In the third column, for each row, square the value in the second column. So this third column will contain

the quantity (Data Value - Mean)2 for each row. We can write this quantity as           . Note that the

values in this third column will always be positive because they represent a squared quantity.

5. Add up all the values in the third column. This sum can be written as             .

6. Divide this sum by the quantity (n - 1), where n is the number of data points. We can write this as

                    .
7. This result is called the sample variance, denoted by s2. Thus, the formula for the sample variance is

                           .
8. Now take the square root of the sample variance. This value is the sample standard deviation, called s.

Thus, the formula for the sample standard deviation is                    .

9. Round-off rule: The sample variance and sample standard deviation are typically rounded to one more
     decimal place than the data values themselves.

THINK IT THROUGH

Finding Standard Deviation and Variance

A brokerage firm advertises a new financial analyst position and receives 210 applications. The ages of a
sample of 10 applicants for the position are as follows:

The brokerage firm is interested in determining the standard deviation and variance for this sample of 10
ages.

Solution:

Find the sample variance and sample standard deviation by creating a table with three columns (see Table
13.3).

1. The data set is 40, 36, 44, 51, 54, 55, 39, 47, 44, 50.

2. This data set has 10 data values. Thus,  .

3. The mean is calculated as        .

4. Column 1 will contain the data values themselves.

5. Column 2 will contain      .

6. Column 3 will contain         .

                                 Column 1 Column 2          Column 3

                                      40
                                      36
                                      44
                                      51

                                 Table 13.3 Calculations for Standard Deviation for
                                 Age Example
388 13 · Statistical Analysis in Finance

                                          Column 1 Column 2    Column 3

                                                   54
                                                   55
                                                   39
                                                   47
                                                   44
                                                   50

                                                      Table 13.3 Calculations for Standard Deviation for
                                                      Age Example

7. To calculate the sample variance, use the sample variance formula:

8. To calculate the sample standard deviation, use the sample standard deviation formula:

As the above example illustrates, calculating the variance and standard deviation is a tedious process. A
financial calculator can calculate statistical measurements such as mean and standard deviation quickly and
efficiently.

There are two steps needed to perform statistical calculations on the calculator:

1. Enter the data in the calculator using the [DATA] function, which is located above the 7 key.
2. Access the statistical results provided by the calculator using the [STAT] function, which is located above

      the 8 key.

Follow the steps in Table 13.4 to calculate mean and standard deviation using the financial calculator. The ages
data set from the Think It Through example above is used again here: 40, 36, 44, 51, 54, 55, 39, 47, 44, 50.

Step                                      Description          Enter                                      Display

1 Enter [DATA] entry mode                                    2ND [DATA]                                   X01 0.00

2 Clear any previous data                                    2ND [CLR WORK] X01 0.00

3 Enter first data value of 40                               40 ENTER                                     X01 = 40.00

4 Move to next data entry                                                                                 Y01 = 1.00

5 Move to next data entry                                                                                 X02  0.0

6 Enter second data value of 36                              36 ENTER                                     X02 = 36.00

Table 13.4 Calculator Steps for Mean and Standard Deviation2

2 The specific financial calculator in these examples is the Texas Instruments BA II PlusTM Professional model, but you can use other
financial calculators for these types of calculations.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              13.2 · Measures of Spread 389

Step  Description                             Enter             Display
                                                              Y02 = 1.00
7 Move to next data entry                                     X03 0.00
                                                              X03 = 44.00
8 Move to next data entry                                     Y03 = 1.00

9 Enter third data value of 44              44 ENTER          LIN
                                                              n = 10.00
10 Move to next data entry                  
                                                                       46.00
11 Continue to enter remaining data values                    Sx = 6.50

12 Enter [STAT] mode                        2nd [STAT]

13 Move to first statistical result         

14 Move to next statistical result          

15 Move to next statistical result          

Table 13.4 Calculator Steps for Mean and Standard Deviation2

From the statistical results, the mean is shown as 46, and the sample standard deviation is shown as 6.50.

Excel provides a similar analysis using the built-in functions =AVERAGE (for the mean) and =STDEV.S (for the
sample standard deviation). To calculate these statistical results in Excel, enter the data values in a column.
Let's assume the data values are placed in cells A2 through A11. In any cell, type the Excel command
=AVERAGE(A2:A11) and press enter. Excel will calculate the arithmetic mean in this cell. Then, in any other cell,
type the Excel command =STDEV.S(A2:A11) and press enter. Excel will calculate the sample standard deviation
in this cell. Figure 13.2 shows the mean and standard deviation for the 10 ages.

                                                        Figure 13.2 Mean and Standard Deviation in Excel.

Relationship between Standard Deviation and Variance

In the formulas shown above for variance and standard deviation, notice that the variance is the square of the
standard deviation, and the standard deviation is the square root of the variance.

Once you have calculated one of these values, you can directly calculate the other value. For example, if you
know the standard deviation of a data set is 12.5, you can calculate the variance by squaring this standard
deviation. The variance is then 12.52, which is 156.25.

In the same way, if you know the value of the variance, you can determine the standard deviation by
calculating the square root of the variance. For example, if the variance of a data set is known to be 31.36, then
the standard deviation can be calculated as the square root of 31.36, which is 5.6.
390 13 · Statistical Analysis in Finance

       One disadvantage of using the variance is that the variance is measured in square units, which are different
       from the units in the data set. For example, if the data set consists of ages measured in years, then the
       variance would be measured in years squared, which can be confusing. The standard deviation is measured in
       the same units as the original data set, and thus the standard deviation is used more commonly than the
       variance to measure the spread of a data set.

      13.3 Measures of Position

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Define and calculate z-scores for a measurement.
         · Define and calculate quartiles and percentiles for a data set.
         · Use quartiles as a method to detect outliers in a data set.

      z-Scores

       A z-score, also called a z-value, is a measure of the position of an entry in a data set. It represents the number
       of standard deviations by which a data value differs from the mean. For example, suppose that in a certain
       year, the rates of return for various technology-focused mutual funds are examined, and the mean return is
       7.8% with a standard deviation of 2.3%. A certain mutual fund publishes its rate of return as 12.4%. Based on
       this rate of return of 12.4%, we can calculate the relative standing of this mutual fund compared to the other
       technology-focused mutual funds. The corresponding z-score of a measurement considers the given
       measurement in relation to the mean and standard deviation for the entire population.

       The formula for a z-score calculation is as follows:

where x is the measurement, is the mean, and is the standard deviation.

THINK IT THROUGH

Interpreting a z-Score

A certain technology-based mutual fund reports a rate of return of 12.4% for a certain year, while the mean
rate of return for comparable funds is 7.8% and the standard deviation is 2.3%. Calculate and interpret the
z-score for this particular mutual fund.

Solution:

In this example, the measurement      and  Using the z-score formula, the
calculation is performed as follows:

  The resulting z-score indicates the number of standard deviations by which a particular measurement is
  above or below the mean. In this example, the rate of return for this particular mutual fund is 2 standard
  deviations above the mean, indicating that this mutual fund generated a significantly better rate of return
  than all other technology-based mutual funds for the same time period.

Quartiles and Percentiles

If a person takes an IQ test, their resulting score might be reported as in the 87th percentile. This percentile
indicates the person's relative performance compared to others taking the IQ test. A person scoring in the
87th percentile has an IQ score higher than 87% of all others taking the test. This is the same as saying that the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                    13.3 · Measures of Position 391

person is in the top 13% of all people taking the IQ test.

Common measures of location are quartiles and percentiles. Quartiles are special percentiles. The first
quartile, Q1, is the same as the 25th percentile, and the third quartile, Q3, is the same as the 75th percentile.
The median, M, is called both the second quartile and the 50th percentile.

To calculate quartiles and percentiles, the data must be ordered from smallest to largest. Quartiles divide
ordered data into quarters. Percentiles divide ordered data into hundredths. If you score in the 90th percentile
of an exam, that does not necessarily mean that you receive 90% on the test. It means that 90% of the test
scores are the same as or less than your score and the remaining 10% of the scores are the same as or greater
than your score.

Percentiles are useful for comparing values. In a finance example, a mutual fund might report that the
performance for the fund over the past year was in the 80th percentile of all mutual funds in the peer group.
This indicates that the fund performed better than 80% of all other funds in the peer group. This also indicates
that 20% of the funds performed better than this particular fund.

Quartiles are values that separate the data into quarters. Quartiles may or may not be part of the data. To find
the quartiles, first find the median, or second quartile. The first quartile, Q1, is the middle value, or median, of
the lower half of the data, and the third quartile, Q3, is the middle value of the upper half of the data. As an
example, consider the following ordered data set, which represents the rates of return for a group of
technology-based mutual funds in a certain year:

The median, or second quartile, is the middle value in this data set, which is 7.2. Notice that 50% of the data
values are below the median, and 50% of the data values are above the median. The lower half of the data
values are 5.4, 6.0, 6.3, 6.8, 7.1 Notice that these are the data values below the median. The upper half of the
data values are 7.4, 7.5, 7.9, 8.2, 8.7, which are the data values above the median.)

To find the first quartile, Q1, locate the middle value of the lower half of the data. The middle value of the lower
half of the data set is 6.3. Notice that one-fourth, or 25%, of the data values are below this first quartile, and
75% of the data values are above this first quartile.

To find the third quartile, Q3, locate the middle value of the upper half of the data. The middle value of the
upper half of the data set is 7.9. Notice that one-fourth, or 25%, of the data values are above this third quartile,
and 75% of the data values are below this third quartile.

The interquartile range (IQR) is a number that indicates the spread of the middle half, or the middle 50%, of
the data. It is the difference between the third quartile, Q3, and the first quartile, Q1.

In the above example, the IQR can be calculated as

Outlier Detection

Quartiles and the IQR can be used to flag possible outliers in a data set. For example, if most employees at a
company earn about $50,000 and the CEO of the company earns $2.5 million, then we consider the CEO's
salary to be an outlier data value because is significantly different from all the other salaries in the data set. An
outlier data value can also be a value much lower than the other data values, so if one employee only makes
$15,000, then this employee's low salary might also be considered an outlier.

To detect outliers, use the quartiles and the IQR to calculate a lower and an upper bound for outliers. Then any
data values below the lower bound or above the upper bound will be flagged as outliers. These data values
should be further investigated to determine the nature of the outlier condition.
392 13 · Statistical Analysis in Finance

       To calculate the lower and upper bounds for outliers, use the following formulas:

       THINK IT THROUGH
       Calculating the IQR

         Calculate the IQR for the following 13 portfolio values, and determine if any of the portfolio values are
         potential outliers. Data values are in dollars.
         389,950; 230,500; 158,000; 479,000; 639,000; 114,950; 5,500,000; 387,000; 659,000; 529,000; 575,000; 488,800;
         1,095,000
         Solution:
         Order the data from smallest to largest.
         114,950; 158,000; 230,500; 387,000; 389,950; 479,000; 488,800; 529,000; 575,000; 639,000; 659,000; 1,095,000;
         5,500,000

         No portfolio value price is less than -201,625. However, 5,500,000 is more than 1,159,375. Therefore, the
         portfolio value of 5,500,000 is a potential outlier. This is important because the presence of outliers could
         potentially indicate data errors or some other anomalies in the data set that should be investigated.

      13.4 Statistical Distributions

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Construct and interpret a frequency distribution.
         · Apply and evaluate probabilities using the normal distribution.
         · Apply and evaluate probabilities using the exponential distribution.

      Frequency Distributions

       A frequency distribution provides a method to organize and summarize a data set. For example, we might be
       interested in the spread, center, and shape of the data set's distribution. When a data set has many data
       values, it can be difficult to see patterns and come to conclusions about important characteristics of the data.
       A frequency distribution allows us to organize and tabulate the data in a summarized way and also to create
       graphs to help facilitate an interpretation of the data set.
       To create a basic frequency distribution, set up a table with three columns. The first column will show the
       intervals for the data, and the second column will show the frequency of the data values, or the count of how

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                13.4 · Statistical Distributions 393

many data values fall within each interval. A third column can be added to include the relative frequency for
each row, which is calculated by taking the frequency for that row and dividing it by the sum of all the
frequencies in the table.

 THINK IT THROUGH

 Graphing Demand and Supply

  A financial consultant at a brokerage firm records the portfolio values for 20 clients, as shown in Table 13.5,
  where the portfolio values are shown in thousands of dollars.

                                                            278 318 422 577 618
                                                            735 798 864 903 944
                                                         1,052 1,099 1,132 1,180 1,279
                                                         1,365 1,471 1,572 1,787 1,905

                                                                    Table 13.5 Portfolio Values for 20
                                                                    Clients at a Brokerage Firm
                                                                    ($000s)

  Create a frequency distribution table using the following intervals for the portfolio values:
                                                                          0-299

                                                                         300-599
                                                                         600-899
                                                                       900-1,199
                                                                      1,200-1,499
                                                                      1,500-1,799
                                                                      1,800-2,099
  Solution:
  Create a table where the intervals for portfolio value are listed in the first column. For this example, it was
  decided to create a frequency distribution table with seven rows and a class width set to 300. The class
  width is the distance from the start of one interval to the start of the next interval in the subsequent row.
  For example, the interval for the second row starts at 300, the interval for the third row starts at 600, and so
  on.
  In the second column, record the frequency, or the number of data values that fall within the interval, for
  each row. For example, for the first row, count the number of data values that fall between 0 and 299.
  Because there is only one data value (278) that falls in this interval, the corresponding frequency is 1. For
  the second row, there are 3 data values that fall between 300 and 599 (318, 422, and 577). Thus, the
  frequency for the second row is 3.
  For the third column, called relative frequency, take the frequency for each row and divide it by the sum of
  the frequencies, which is 20. For example, in the first row, the relative frequency will be 1 divided by 20,
  which is 0.05. The relative frequency for the second row will be 3 divided by 20, which is 0.15. The resulting
  frequency distribution table is shown in Table 13.6.
394 13 · Statistical Analysis in Finance

Portfolio Value Interval ($000s) Frequency Relative Frequency

                                          0-299        1  0.05

                                          300-599      3  0.15

                                          600-899      4  0.20

                                          900-1,199    6  0.30

                                          1,200-1,499  3  0.15

                                          1,500-1,799  2  0.10

                                          1,800-2,099  1  0.05

Table 13.6 Frequency Distribution of Portfolio Values for 20 Clients at a
Brokerage Firm ($000s)

The frequency table indicates that most customers have portfolio values between $300,000 and $599,000, as
this row in the table shows the highest frequency. Very few customers have portfolios with a value below
$299,000 or above $1,800,000, as these frequencies in these rows are very low. Because the highest
frequency corresponds to the row in the middle of the table and the frequencies decrease with each
interval below and above this middle interval, the frequency table indicates that this distribution is a bell-
shaped distribution.

The following is a summary of how to create a frequency distribution table (for integer data). Note that the
number of classes in a frequency table is the same as the number of rows in the table.

1. Calculate the class width using the formula
   Note: For integer data, round the class width up to the next whole number.

2. Create a table with a number of rows equal to the number of classes. Create columns for Lower Class
      Limit, Upper Class Limit, Frequency, and Relative Frequency.

3. Set the lower class limit for the first row equal to the minimum value from the data set, or some other
      appropriate value.

4. Calculate the lower class limit for the second row by adding the class width to the lower class limit from
      the first row. Add the class width to each new lower class limit to calculate the lower class limit for each
      subsequent row.

5. The upper class limit for each row is 1 less than the lower class limit of the subsequent row. You can
      also add the class width to each upper class limit to determine the upper class limit for the subsequent
      row.

6. Record the frequency for each row by counting how many data values fall between the lower class limit
      and the upper class limit for that row.

7. Calculate the relative frequency for each row by taking the frequency for that row and dividing by the
      total number of data values.

Normal Distribution

The normal probability density function, a continuous distribution, is the most important of all the
distributions. The normal distribution is applicable when the frequency of data values decreases with each
class above and below the mean. The normal distribution can be applied to many examples from the finance
industry, including average returns for mutual funds over a certain time period, portfolio values, and others.
The normal distribution has two parameters, or numerical descriptive measures: the mean, , and the
standard deviation, . The variable x represents the quantity being measured whose data values have a

Access for free at openstax.org
                      13.4 · Statistical Distributions 395

normal distribution.

                                                            Figure 13.3 Graph of the Normal Distribution

The curve in Figure 13.3 is symmetric about a vertical line drawn through the mean, . The mean is the same
as the median, which is the same as the mode, because the graph is symmetric about . As the notation
indicates, the normal distribution depends only on the mean and the standard deviation. Because the area
under the curve must equal 1, a change in the standard deviation, , causes a change in the shape of the
normal curve; the curve becomes fatter and wider or skinnier and taller depending on . A change in causes
the graph to shift to the left or right. This means there are an infinite number of normal probability
distributions.

To determine probabilities associated with the normal distribution, we find specific areas under the normal
curve, and this is further discussed in Apply the Normal Distribution in Financial Contexts. For example,
suppose that at a financial consulting company, the mean employee salary is $60,000 with a standard
deviation of $7,500. A normal curve can be drawn to represent this scenario, in which the mean of $60,000
would be plotted on the horizontal axis, corresponding to the peak of the curve. Then, to find the probability
that an employee earns more than $75,000, you would calculate the area under the normal curve to the right
of the data value $75,000.

Excel uses the following command to find the area under the normal curve to the left of a specified value:

                                      =NORM.DIST(XVALUE, MEAN, STANDARD_DEV, TRUE)

For example, at the financial consulting company mentioned above, the mean employee salary is $60,000 with
a standard deviation of $7,500. To find the probability that a random employee's salary is less than $55,000
using Excel, this is the command you would use:

                                             =NORM.DIST(55000, 60000, 7500, TRUE)

                                                                 Result: 0.25249

Thus, there is a probability of about 25% that a random employee has a salary less than $55,000.

Exponential Distribution

The exponential distribution is often concerned with the amount of time until some specific event occurs. For
example, a finance professional might want to model the time to default on payments for company debt
holders.

An exponential distribution is one in which there are fewer large values and more small values. For example,
marketing studies have shown that the amount of money customers spend in a store follows an exponential
distribution. There are more people who spend small amounts of money and fewer people who spend large
amounts of money.

Exponential distributions are commonly used in calculations of product reliability, or the length of time a
product lasts. The random variable for the exponential distribution is continuous and often measures a
396 13 · Statistical Analysis in Finance

       passage of time, although it can be used in other applications. Typical questions may be, What is the
       probability that some event will occur between x1 hours and x2 hours? or What is the probability that the event
       will take more than x1 hours to perform? In these examples, the random variable x equals either the time
       between events or the passage of time to complete an action (e.g., wait on a customer). The probability
       density function is given by

       where is the historical average of the values of the random variable (e.g., the historical average waiting
       time). This probability density function has a mean and standard deviation of .
       To determine probabilities associated with the exponential distribution, we find specific areas under the
       exponential distribution curve. The following formula can be used to calculate the area under the exponential
       curve to the left of a certain value:

       THINK IT THROUGH
       Calculating Probability

         At a financial company, the mean time between incoming phone calls is 45 seconds, and the time between
         phone calls follows an exponential distribution, where the time is measured in minutes. Calculate the
         probability of having 2 minutes or less between phone calls.
         Solution:
         To calculate the probability, find the area under the curve to the left of 1 minute. The mean time is given as
         45 seconds, which is the same as 0.75 minutes. The probability can then be calculated as follows:

      13.5 Probability Distributions

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Calculate portfolio weights in an investment.
         · Calculate and interpret the expected values.
         · Apply the normal distribution to characterize average and standard deviation in financial contexts.

      Calculate Portfolio Weights

       In many financial analyses, the weightings by asset category in a portfolio are a key index used to assess if
       the portfolio is meeting allocation metrics. For example, an investor approaching retirement age may wish to
       shift assets in a portfolio to more conservative and lower-volatility investments. Weightings can be calculated
       in several different ways--for example, based on individual stocks in a portfolio or on various sectors in a
       portfolio. Weightings can also be calculated based on number of shares or the value of shares of a stock.
       To calculate a weighting in a portfolio based on value, take the value of the particular investment and divide it
       by the total value of the overall portfolio. As an example, consider an individual's retirement account for which
       the desired portfolio weighting is determined to be 40% stocks, 50% bonds, and 10% cash equivalents. Table
       13.7 shows the current assets in the individual's portfolio, broken out according to stocks, bonds, and cash
       equivalents.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                13.5 · Probability Distributions 397

Asset        Value ($)

Stock A      134,000

Stock B      172,000

Bond C       38,000

Bond D       102,000

Bond E       96,000

Cash in CDs  35,700

Cash in savings 22,500

Total Value 600,200

Table 13.7 Portfolio Assets in
Stocks, Bonds, and Cash
Equivalents

To determine the weighting in this portfolio for stocks, bonds, and cash, take the total value for each category
and divide it by the total value of the entire portfolio. These results are summarized in Table 13.8. Notice that
the portfolio weightings shown in the table do not match the target, or desired, allocation weightings of 40%
stocks, 50% bonds, and 10% cash equivalents.

                                     Asset Category Category Value ($) Portfolio Weighting
                                            Stocks

                                            Bonds

                                             Cash
                                        Total Value

                                            Table 13.8 Portfolio Weightings for Stocks, Bonds, and Cash
                                            Equivalents

Portfolio rebalancing is a process whereby the investor buys or sells assets to achieve the desired portfolio
weightings. In this example, the investor could sell approximately 10% of the stock assets and purchase bonds
with the proceeds to align the asset categories to the desired portfolio weightings.

Calculate and Interpret Expected Values

A probability distribution is a mathematical function that assigns probabilities to various outcomes. For
example, we can assign a probability to the outcome of a certain stock increasing in value or decreasing in
value. One application of a probability distribution function is determining expected value.

In many financial situations, we are interested in determining the expected value of the return on a particular
investment or the expected return on a portfolio of multiple investments. To calculate expected returns, we
formulate a probability distribution and then use the following formula to calculate expected value:

where P1, P2, P3,  Pn are the probabilities of the various returns and R1, R2, R3,  Rn are the various rates of
return.

In essence, expected value is a weighted mean where the probabilities form the weights. Typically, these
values for Pn and Rn are derived from historical data. As an example, consider a probability distribution for
398 13 · Statistical Analysis in Finance

       potential returns for United Airlines common stock. Assume that from historical data gathered over a certain
       time period, there is a 15% probability of generating a 12% return on investment for this stock, a 35%
       probability of generating a 5% return, a 25% probability of generating a 2% return, a 14% probability of
       generating a 5% loss, and an 11% probability of resulting in a 10% loss. This data can be organized into a
       probability distribution table as seen in Table 13.9.

       Using the expected value formula, the expected return of United Airlines stock over an extended period of
       time follows:

Based on the probability distribution, the expected value of the rate of return for United Airlines common
stock over an extended period of time is 2.25%.

Historical Return (%) Associated Probability (%)

             12   15

             5    35

             2    25

             -5   14

             -10  11

Table 13.9 Probability Distribution for Historical Returns
on United Airlines Stock

We can extend this analysis to evaluate the expected return for an investment portfolio consisting of various
asset categories, such as stocks, bonds, and cash equivalents, where the probabilities are associated with the
weighting of each category relative to the total value of the portfolio. Using historical return data for each of
the asset categories, the expected return of the overall portfolio can be calculated using the expected value
formula.

Assume an investor has assets in stocks, bonds, and cash equivalents as shown in Table 13.10.

Asset Category Value ($) Portfolio Weighting Historical Return (%)

Stocks                                                                     13.0

Bonds                                                                      4.0

Cash                                                                       2.5

Total Value

Table 13.10 Portfolio Weightings and Historical Returns for Various Asset
Categories

Based on the probability distribution, the expected value of the rate of return for this portfolio over an
extended period of time is 8.44%.

Apply the Normal Distribution in Financial Contexts

The normal, or bell-shaped, distribution can be utilized in many applications, including financial contexts.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                               13.5 · Probability Distributions 399

Remember that the normal distribution has two parameters: the mean, which is the center of the distribution,
and the standard deviation, which measures the spread of the distribution. Here are several examples of
applications of the normal distribution:

  · IQ scores follow a normal distribution, with a mean IQ score of 100 and a standard deviation of 15.
  · Salaries at a certain company follow a normal distribution, with a mean salary of $52,000 and a standard

      deviation of $4,800.
  · Grade point averages (GPAs) at a certain college follow a normal distribution, with a mean GPA of 3.27 and

      a standard deviation of 0.24.
  · The average annual gain of the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) over a 40-year time period follows a

      normal distribution, with a mean gain of 485 points and a standard deviation of 1,065 points.
  · The average annual return on the S&P 500 over a 50-year time period follows a normal distribution, with a

      mean rate of return of 10.5% and a standard deviation of 14.3%.
  · The average annual return on mid-cap stock funds over the five-year period from 2010 to 2015 follows a

      normal distribution, with a mean rate of return of 8.9% and a standard deviation of 3.7%.

When analyzing data sets that follow a normal distribution, probabilities can be calculated by finding areas
under the normal curve. To find the probability that a measurement is within a specific interval, we can
compute the area under the normal curve corresponding to the interval of interest.

Areas under the normal curve are available in tables, and Excel also provides a method to find these areas. The
empirical rule is one method for determining areas under the normal curve that fall within a certain number
of standard deviations of the mean (see Figure 13.4).

       Figure 13.4 Normal Distribution Showing Mean and Increments of Standard Deviation

If x is a random variable and has a normal distribution with mean µ and standard deviation , then the
empirical rule states the following:

· About 68% of the x-values lie between    and  units from the mean (within one standard deviation

of the mean).

· About 95% of the x-values lie between    and  units from the mean (within two standard

deviations of the mean).

· About 99.7% of the x-values lie between  and  units from the mean (within three standard

deviations of the mean). Notice that almost all the x-values lie within three standard deviations of the

mean.

· The z-scores for  and   are and , respectively.

· The z-scores for  and   are and , respectively.

· The z-scores for  and   are and , respectively.

As an example of using the empirical rule, suppose we know that the average annual return for mid-cap stock
funds over the five-year period from 2010 to 2015 follows a normal distribution, with a mean rate of return of
8.9% and a standard deviation of 3.7%. We are interested in knowing the likelihood that a randomly selected
mid-cap stock fund provides a rate of return that falls within one standard deviation of the mean, which
400 13 · Statistical Analysis in Finance

implies a rate of return between 5.2% and 12.6%. Using the empirical rule, the area under the normal curve
within one standard deviation of the mean is 68%. Thus, there is a probability, or likelihood, of 0.68 that a mid-
cap stock fund will provide a rate of return between 5.2% and 12.6%.

If the interval of interest is extended to two standard deviations from the mean (a rate of return between 1.5%
and 16.3%), using the empirical rule, we can determine that the area under the normal curve within two
standard deviations of the mean is 95%. Thus, there is a probability, or likelihood, of 0.95 that a mid-cap stock
fund will provide a rate of return between 1.5% and 16.3%.

 13.6 Data Visualization and Graphical Displays

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Determine appropriate graphs to use for various types of data.
  · Create and interpret univariate graphs such as bar graphs and histograms.
  · Create and interpret bivariate graphs such as time series graphs and scatter plot graphs.

Graphing Univariate Data

Data visualization refers to the use of graphical displays to summarize data to help to interpret patterns and
trends in the data. Univariate data refers to observations recorded for a single characteristic or attribute, such
as salaries or blood pressure measurements. When graphing univariate data, we can choose from among
several types of graphs, such as bar graphs, time series graphs, and so on.

The most effective type of graph to use for a certain data set will depend on the nature of the data and the
purpose of the graph. For example, a time series graph is typically used to show how a measurement is
changing over time and to identify patterns or trends over time.

Below are some examples of typical applications for various graphs and displays.

Graphs used to show the distribution of data:

· Bar chart: used to show frequency or relative frequency distributions for categorical data
· Histogram: used to show frequency or relative frequency distributions for continuous data

Graphs used to show relationships between data points:

· Time series graph: used to show measurement data plotted against time, where time is displayed on the
   horizontal axis

· Scatter plot: used to show the relationship between a dependent variable and an independent variable

Bar Graphs

A bar graph consists of bars that are separated from each other and compare percentages. The bars can be
rectangles, or they can be rectangular boxes (used in three-dimensional plots), and they can be vertical or
horizontal. The bar graph shown in the example below has age groups represented on the x-axis and
proportions on the y-axis.

By the end of 2021, a certain social media site had over 146 million users in the United States. Table 13.11
shows three age groups, the number of users in each age group, and the proportion (%) of users in each age
group. A bar graph using this data is shown in Figure 13.5.

            Age Groups Number of Site Users Percent of Site Users

                                 13-25    65,082,280      45

                                 26-44    53,300,200      36

            Table 13.11 Data for Bar Graph of Age Groups

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             13.6 · Data Visualization and Graphical Displays 401

               Age Groups Number of Site Users Percent of Site Users

                              45-64  27,885,100              19

               Table 13.11 Data for Bar Graph of Age Groups

                                                                  Figure 13.5 Bar Graph of Age Groups

Histograms

A histogram is a bar graph that is used for continuous numeric data, such as salaries, blood pressures,
heights, and so on. One advantage of a histogram is that it can readily display large data sets. A rule of thumb
is to use a histogram when the data set consists of 100 values or more.

A histogram consists of contiguous (adjoining) boxes. It has both a horizontal axis and a vertical axis. The
horizontal axis is labeled with what the data represents (for instance, distance from your home to school). The
vertical axis is labeled either Frequency or Relative Frequency (or Percent Frequency or Probability). The graph
will have the same shape regardless of the label on the vertical axis. A histogram, like a stem-and-leaf plot, can
give you the shape of the data, the center, and the spread of the data.

The relative frequency is equal to the frequency of an observed data value divided by the total number of data
values in the sample. Remember, frequency is defined as the number of times a solution occurs. Relative
frequency is calculated using the formula

where f = frequency, n = the total number of data values (or the sum of the individual frequencies), and RF =
relative frequency.

To construct a histogram, first decide how many bars or intervals, also called classes, will represent the data.

Many histograms consist of 5 to 15 bars or classes for clarity. The number of bars needs to be chosen. Choose

a starting point for the first interval that is less than the smallest data value. A convenient starting point is a

lower value carried out to one more decimal place than the value with the most decimal places. For example, if

the value with the most decimal places is 6.1, and if this is the smallest value, a convenient starting point is

6.05 (because                 ). We say that 6.05 has more precision. If the value with the most decimal

places is 2.23 and the lowest value is 1.5, a convenient starting point is 1.495 (                 ). If the value

with the most decimal places is 3.234 and the lowest value is 1.0, a convenient starting point is

                              . If all the data values happen to be integers and the smallest value is 2, then a

convenient starting point is         . Also, when the starting point and other boundaries are

carried to one additional decimal place, no data value will fall on a boundary. The next two examples go into

detail about how to construct a histogram using continuous data and how to create a histogram using discrete

data.
402 13 · Statistical Analysis in Finance

Example: The following data values are the portfolio values, in thousands of dollars, for 100 investors.

60, 60.5, 61, 61, 61.5
63.5, 63.5, 63.5
64, 64, 64, 64, 64, 64, 64, 64.5, 64.5, 64.5, 64.5, 64.5, 64.5, 64.5, 64.5
66, 66, 66, 66, 66, 66, 66, 66, 66, 66, 66.5, 66.5, 66.5, 66.5, 66.5, 66.5, 66.5, 66.5, 66.5, 66.5, 66.5, 67, 67, 67, 67, 67,
67, 67, 67, 67, 67, 67, 67, 67.5, 67.5, 67.5, 67.5, 67.5, 67.5, 67.5
68, 68, 69, 69, 69, 69, 69, 69, 69, 69, 69, 69, 69.5, 69.5, 69.5, 69.5, 69.5
70, 70, 70, 70, 70, 70, 70.5, 70.5, 70.5, 71, 71, 71
72, 72, 72, 72.5, 72.5, 73, 73.5
74

The smallest data value is 60. Because the data values with the most decimal places have one decimal place

(for instance, 61.5), we want our starting point to have two decimal places. Because the numbers 0.5, 0.05,

0.005, and so on are convenient numbers, use 0.05 and subtract it from 60, the smallest value, to get a

convenient starting point:                , which is more precise than, say, 61.5 by one decimal place. Thus,

the starting point is 59.95. The largest value is 74, and  , so 74.05 is the ending value.

Next, calculate the width of each bar or class interval. To calculate this width, subtract the starting point from
the ending value and divide the result by the number of bars (you must choose the number of bars you
desire). Suppose you choose eight bars. The interval width is calculated as follows:

We will round up to 2 and make each bar or class interval 2 units wide. Rounding up to 2 is one way to prevent
a value from falling on a boundary. Rounding to the next number is often necessary, even if it goes against the
standard rules of rounding. For this example, using 1.76 as the width would also work. A guideline that is
followed by some for the width of a bar or class interval is to take the square root of the number of data values
and then round to the nearest whole number if necessary. For example, if there are 150 data values, take the
square root of 150 and round to 12 bars or intervals. The boundaries are as follows:

The data values 60 through 61.5 are in the interval 59.95-61.95. The data values of 63.5 are in the interval
61.95-63.95. The data values of 64 and 64.5 are in the interval 63.95-65.95. The data values 66 through 67.5 are
in the interval 65.95-67.95. The data values 68 through 69.5 are in the interval 67.95-69.95. The data values 70
through 71 are in the interval 69.95-71.95. The data values 72 through 73.5 are in the interval 71.95-73.95. The
data value 74 is in the interval 73.95-75.95. The histogram shown in Figure 13.6 displays the portfolio values on
the x-axis and relative frequency on the y-axis.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                     13.6 · Data Visualization and Graphical Displays 403

                                                               Figure 13.6 Histogram of Portfolio Values

Graphing Bivariate Data

Bivariate data refers to paired data, where each value of one variable is paired with a value of a second
variable. An example of paired data would be if data were collected on employees' years of experience and
their corresponding salaries. Typically, it is of interest to investigate possible associations or correlations
between the two variables under analysis.
Time Series Graphs
Suppose that we want to track the consumer price index (CPI) over the past 10 years. One feature of the data
that we may want to consider is the element of time. Because each year is paired with the CPI value for that
year, we do not have to think of the data as being random. We can instead use the years given to impose a
chronological order on the data. A graph that recognizes this ordering and displays the changing CPI value as
the decade progresses is called a time series graph.
To construct a time series graph, we must look at both pieces of our paired data set. We start with a standard
Cartesian coordinate system. The horizontal axis is used to plot the time increments, and the vertical axis is
used to plot the values of the variable that we are measuring. By doing this, we make each point on the graph
correspond to a point in time and a measured quantity. The points on the graph are typically connected by
straight lines in the order in which they occur.
Example: The following data set shows the annual CPI for 10 years. We need to construct a time series graph
for the (rounded) annual CPI data (see Table 13.12). The time series graph is shown in Figure 13.7.

                                                                      Year CPI
                                                                      2012 226.65
                                                                      2013 230.28
                                                                      2014 233.91

                                                                                   Table 13.12
                                                                                   Data for Time
                                                                                   Series Graph
                                                                                   of Annual CPI,
                                                                                   2012-2021
                                                                                   (source: US
                                                                                   Bureau of
                                                                                   Labor
                                                                                   Statistics)
404 13 · Statistical Analysis in Finance

                                          Year CPI
                                          2015 233.70
                                          2016 236.91
                                          2017 242.84
                                          2018 247.87
                                          2019 251.71
                                          2020 257.97
                                          2021 261.58

                                          Table 13.12
                                          Data for Time
                                          Series Graph
                                          of Annual CPI,
                                          2012-2021
                                          (source: US
                                          Bureau of
                                          Labor
                                          Statistics)

                                                    Figure 13.7 Time Series Graph of Annual CPI, 2012-2021

Scatter Plots
A scatter plot, or scatter diagram, is a graphical display intended to show the relationship between two
variables. The setup of the scatter plot is that one variable is plotted on the horizontal axis and the other
variable is plotted on the vertical axis. Then each pair of data values is considered as an (x, y) point, and the
various points are plotted on the diagram. A visual inspection of the plot is then made to detect any patterns
or trends. Additional statistical analysis can be conducted to determine if there is a correlation or other
statistically significant relationship between the two variables.
Assume we are interested in tracking the closing price of Nike stock over the one-year time period from April
2020 to March 2021. We would also like to know if there is a correlation or relationship between the price of
Nike stock and the value of the S&P 500 over the same time period. To visualize this relationship, we can create
a scatter plot based on the (x, y) data shown in Table 13.13. The resulting scatter plot is shown in Figure 13.8.

Access for free at openstax.org
                    13.6 · Data Visualization and Graphical Displays 405

Date S&P 500 Nike Stock Price ($)

4/1/2020 2,912.43   87.18

5/1/2020 3,044.31   98.58

6/1/2020 3,100.29   98.05

7/1/2020 3,271.12   97.61

8/1/2020 3,500.31   111.89

9/1/2020 3,363.00   125.54

10/1/2020 3,269.96  120.08

11/1/2020 3,621.63  134.70

12/1/2020 3,756.07  141.47

1/1/2021 3,714.24   133.59

2/1/2021 3,811.15   134.78

3/1/2021 3,943.34   140.45

3/12/2021 3,943.34  140.45

Table 13.13 Data for S&P 500 and Nike Stock
Price over a 12-Month Period (source: Yahoo!
Finance)

                                                  Figure 13.8 Scatter Plot of Nike Stock Price versus S&P 500

Note the linear pattern of the points on the scatter plot. Because the data points generally align along a
straight line, this provides an indication of a linear correlation between the price of Nike stock and the value of
the S&P 500 over this one-year time period.

The scatter plot can be generated using Excel as follows:

1. Enter the x-data in column A of a spreadsheet.
2. Enter the y-data in column B.
3. Highlight the data with your mouse.
4. Go to the Insert menu and select the icon for a scatter plot, as shown in Figure 13.9.
406 13 · Statistical Analysis in Finance

13.7                                       Figure 13.9 Excel Menu Showing the Scatter Plot Icon

      The R Statistical Analysis Tool

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Create a vector of data values for the R statistical analysis tool.
  · Write basic statistical commands using the R statistical analysis tool.

Commands and Vectors in R

R is a statistical analysis tool that is widely used in the finance industry. It is available as a free program and
provides an integrated suite of functions for data analysis, graphing, and statistical programming. R is
increasingly being used as a data analysis and statistical tool as it is an open-source language and additional
features are constantly being added by the user community. The tool can be used on many different
computing platforms and can be downloaded at the R Project website (https://openstax.org/r/the-R-project-
website).

LINK TO LEARNING

Using the R Statistical Tool

There are many resources for learning and using the R statistical tool, including the following:
How to install R on different computer operating systems (https://openstax.org/r/how-to-install)
Introduction to using R (https://openstax.org/r/introduction-to-using-R)
How to import and export data using R (https://openstax.org/r/how-to-import-and-export)
Frequently asked questions (FAQ) on using R (https://openstax.org/r/frequently-asked-questions)

Once you have installed and started R on your computer, at the bottom of the R console, you should see the
symbol >, which indicates that R is ready to accept commands.

Type 'demo()' for some demos, 'help()' for on-line help, or 'help.start()' for an HTML
browser interface to help. Type 'q()' to quit R.

       >

R is a command-driven language, meaning that the user enters commands at the prompt, which R then
executes one at a time. R can also execute a program containing multiple commands. There are ways to add a
graphic user interface (GUI) to R. An example of a GUI tool for R is RStudio (https://openstax.org/r/RStudio).

The R command line can be used to perform any numeric calculation, similar to a handheld calculator. For

Access for free at openstax.org
                                     13.7 · The R Statistical Analysis Tool 407

example, to evaluate the expression  enter the following expression at the command line prompt
and hit return:

       > 10+3*7

       [1] 31

Most calculations in R are handled via functions. For statistical analysis, there are many preestablished
functions in R to calculate mean, median, standard deviation, quartiles, and so on. Variables can be named and
assigned values using the assignment operator <-. For example, the following R commands assign the value of
20 to the variable named x and assign the value of 30 to the variable named y:

       > x <- 20

       > y <- 30

These variable names can be used in any calculation, such as multiplying x by y to produce the result 600:
       > x*y
       [1] 600

The typical method for using functions in statistical applications is to first create a vector of data values. There
are several ways to create vectors in R. For example, the c function is often used to combine values into a
vector. The following R command will generate a vector called salaries that contains the data values 40,000,
50,000, 75,000, and 92,000:

       > salaries <- c(40000, 50000, 75000, 92000)

This vector salaries can then be used in statistical functions such as mean, median, min, max, and so on, as
shown:

       > mean(salaries)
       [1] 64250
       > median(salaries)
       [1] 62500
       > min(salaries)
       [1] 40000
       > max(salaries)
       [1] 92000
408 13 · Statistical Analysis in Finance

       Another option for generating a vector in R is to use the seq function, which will automatically generate a
       sequence of numbers. For example, we can generate a sequence of numbers from 1 to 5, incremented by 0.5,
       and call this vector example1, as follows:

              > example1 <- seq(1, 5, by=0.5)

       If we then type the name of the vector and hit enter, R will provide a listing of numeric values for that vector
       name.

              > salaries
              [1] 40000 50000 75000 92000
              > example1
              [1] 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0

       Often, we are interested in generating a quick statistical summary of a data set in the form of its mean,
       median, quartiles, min, and max. The R command called summary provides these results.

              > summary(salaries)
              Min. 1st Qu. Median Mean 3rd Qu. Max.
              40000 47500 62500 64250 79250 92000

       For measures of spread, R includes a command for standard deviation, called sd, and a command for variance,
       called var. The standard deviation and variance are calculated with the assumption that the data set was
       collected from a sample.

              > sd(salaries)
              [1] 23641.42
              > var(salaries)
              [1] 558916667

       To calculate a weighted mean in R, create two vectors, one of which contains the data values and the other of
       which contains the associated weights. Then enter the R command weighted.mean(values, weights).
       The following is an example of a weighted mean calculation in R:
       Assume your portfolio contains 1,000 shares of XYZ Corporation, purchased on three different dates, as shown
       in Table 13.14. Calculate the weighted mean of the purchase price, where the weights are based on the
       number of shares in the portfolio.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        13.7 · The R Statistical Analysis Tool 409

Date Purchased Purchase Price ($) Number of Shares Purchased

January 17   78                                                  200

February 10  122                                                 300

March 23     131                                                 500

Total                                                            1,000

Table 13.14 Portfolio of XYZ Shares

Here is how you would create two vectors in R: the price vector will contain the purchase price, and the shares
vector will contain the number of shares. Then execute the R command weighted.mean(price, shares), as
follows:

       > price <- c(78, 122, 131)

       > shares <- c(200, 300, 500)

       > weighted.mean(price, shares)

       [1] 117.7

A list of common R statistical commands appears in Table 13.15.

R Command                            Result

mean( )      Calculates the arithmetic mean

median( )    Calculates the median

min( )       Calculates the minimum value

max( )       Calculates the maximum value

weighted.mean( ) Calculates the weighted mean

sum( )       Calculates the sum of values

summary( )   Calculates the mean, median, quartiles, min, and max

sd( )        Calculates the sample standard deviation

var( )       Calculates the sample variance

IQR( )       Calculates the interquartile range

barplot( )   Plots a bar chart of non-numeric data

boxplot( )   Plots a boxplot of numeric data

hist( )      Plots a histogram of numeric data

plot( )      Plots various graphs, including a scatter plot

freq( )      Creates a frequency distribution table

Table 13.15 List of Common R Statistical Commands

Graphing in R

There are many statistical applications in R, and many graphical representations are possible, such as bar
graphs, histograms, time series plots, scatter plots, and others. The basic command to create a plot in R is the
410 13 · Statistical Analysis in Finance

       plot command, plot(x, y), where x is a vector containing the x-values of the data set and y is a vector containing
       the y-values of the data set.
       The general format of the command is as follows:

              >plot(x, y, main="text for title of graph", xlab="text for x-axis label", ylab="text
              for y-axis label")
       For example, we are interested in creating a scatter plot to examine the correlation between the value of the
       S&P 500 and Nike stock prices. Assume we have the data shown in Table 13.13, collected over a one-year time
       period.
       Note that data can be read into R from a text file or Excel file or from the clipboard by using various R
       commands. Assume the values of the S&P 500 have been loaded into the vector SP500 and the values of Nike
       stock prices have been loaded into the vector Nike. Then, to generate the scatter plot, we can use the following
       R command:
              >plot(SP500, Nike, main="Scatter Plot of Nike Stock Price vs. S&P 500", xlab="S&P
              500", ylab="Nike Stock Price")
       As a result of these commands, R provides the scatter plot shown in Figure 13.10. This is the same data that
       was used to generate the scatter plot in Figure 13.8 in Excel.

                                             Figure 13.10 Scatter Plot Generated by R for Nike Stock Price versus S&P 500

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                               13 · Summary 411

     Summary

13.1 Measures of Center

Several measurements are used to provide the average of a data set, including mean, median, and mode. The
terms mean and average are often used interchangeably. To calculate the mean for a set of numbers, add the
numbers together and then divide the sum by the number of data values. The geometric mean redistributes
not the sum of the values but the product by multiplying all of the individual values and then redistributing
them in equal portions such that the total product remains the same. To calculate the median for a set of
numbers, order the data from smallest to largest and identify the middle data value in the ordered data set.

13.2 Measures of Spread

The standard deviation and variance are measures of the spread of a data set. The standard deviation is small
when the data values are all concentrated close to the mean, exhibiting little variation or spread. The standard
deviation is larger when the data values are more spread out from the mean, exhibiting more variation. The
formula used to calculate the standard deviation depends on whether the data represents a sample or a
population, as the formulas for the sample standard deviation and the population standard deviation are
slightly different.

13.3 Measures of Position

Several measures are used to indicate the position of a data value in a data set. One measure of position is the
z-score for a particular measurement. The z-score indicates how many standard deviations a particular
measurement is above or below the mean. Other measures of position include quartiles and percentiles.
Quartiles are special percentiles. The first quartile, Q1, is the same as the 25th percentile, and the third quartile,
Q3, is the same as the 75th percentile. The median, M, is called both the second quartile and the 50th
percentile. To calculate quartiles and percentiles, the data must be ordered from smallest to largest. Quartiles
divide ordered data into quarters. Percentiles divide ordered data into hundredths.

13.4 Statistical Distributions

A frequency distribution provides a method of organizing and summarizing a data set and allows us to
organize and tabulate the data in a summarized way. Once a frequency distribution is generated, it can be
used to create graphs to help facilitate an interpretation of the data set. The normal distribution has two
parameters, or numerical descriptive measures: the mean, , and the standard deviation, . The exponential
distribution is often concerned with the amount of time until some specific event occurs.

13.5 Probability Distributions

A probability distribution is a mathematical function that assigns probabilities to various outcomes. In many
financial situations, we are interested in determining the expected value of the return on a particular
investment or the expected return on a portfolio of multiple investments. When analyzing distributions that
follow a normal distribution, probabilities can be calculated by finding the area under the graph of the normal
curve.

13.6 Data Visualization and Graphical Displays

Data visualization refers to the use of graphical displays to summarize a data set to help to interpret patterns
and trends in the data. Univariate data refers to observations recorded for a single characteristic or attribute,
such as salaries or blood pressure measurements. When graphing univariate data, we can choose from among
several types of graphs. The type of graph to be used for a certain data set will depend on the nature of the
data and the purpose of the graph. Examples of graphs for univariate data include line graphs, bar graphs,
and histograms. Bivariate data refers to paired data where each value of one variable is paired with a value of
a second variable. Examples of graphs for bivariate data include time series graphs and scatter plots.
412 13 · Key Terms

13.7 The R Statistical Analysis Tool

R is an open-source statistical analysis tool that is widely used in the finance industry. It provides an integrated
suite of functions for data analysis, graphing, and statistical programming. R is increasingly being used as a
data analysis and statistical tool as it is an open-source language, and additional features are constantly being
added by the user community. This tool can be used on many different computing platforms and can be
downloaded at The R Project for Statistical Computing (https://openstax.org/r/The-R-Project).

     Key Terms

arithmetic mean a measure of center of a data set, calculated by adding up the data values and dividing the
    sum by the number of data values

bar graph a chart that presents categorical data in a summarized form based on frequency or relative
    frequency

bivariate data paired data in which each value of one variable is paired with a value of a second variable
data visualization the use of graphical displays, such as bar charts, histograms, and scatter plots, to help

    interpret patterns and trends in a data set
empirical rule a rule that provides the percentages of data values falling within one, two, and three standard

    deviations from the mean for a bell-shaped (normal) distribution
expected value a weighted average of the values of a variable where the weights are the associated

    probabilities
exponential distribution a continuous probability distribution that is useful for calculating probabilities

    within the time between events
frequency distribution a method of organizing and summarizing a data set that provides the frequency

    with which each value in the data set occurs
geometric mean a measure of center of a data set, calculated by multiplying the data values and then

   raising the product to the exponent , where n is the number of data values
histogram a graphical display of continuous data showing class intervals on the horizontal axis and

    frequency or relative frequency on the vertical axis
interquartile range (IQR) a number that indicates the spread of the middle half, or middle 50%, of the data;

   the difference between the third quartile (Q3) and the first quartile (Q1)
median the middle value in an ordered data set
mode the most frequently occurring data value in a data set
normal distribution a bell-shaped distribution curve that is used to model many measurements, including

    IQ scores, salaries, heights, weights, blood pressures, etc.
outliers data values that are significantly different from the other data values in a data set
percentiles numbers that divide an ordered data set into hundredths; often used to indicate position of a

    data value in a data set
population data data representing all the outcomes or measurements that are of interest
portfolio a collection of financial investments, such as stocks, bonds, mutual funds, certificates of deposit,

    etc.
probability distribution a mathematical function that assigns probabilities to various outcomes
quartiles numbers that divide an ordered data set into quarters; the second quartile is the same as the

    median
sample data data representing outcomes or measurements collected from a subset or part of a population
scatter plot (or scatter diagram) a graphical display that shows the relationship between a dependent

    variable and an independent variable
standard deviation a measure of the spread of a data set that indicates how far a typical data value is from

    the mean
time series graph a graphical display used to show measurement data plotted versus time, where time is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          13 · CFA Institute 413

    displayed on the horizontal axis
variance the measure of the spread of data values calculated as the square of the standard deviation
weighted mean a measure of center of a data set in which each data value has a corresponding weighting
x-axis the horizontal axis in a rectangular coordinate system
y-axis the vertical axis in a rectangular coordinate system
z-score (or z-value) a measure of the position of a data value in the data set, calculated by subtracting the

    mean from the data value and then dividing the difference by the standard deviation

     CFA Institute

This chapter supports some of the Learning Outcome Statements (LOS) in this CFA® Level I Study Session
(https://openstax.org/r/cfa-level1-study-session). Reference with permission of CFA Institute.

     Multiple Choice

 1. A data set of salaries contains an outlier salary. The best measure of center to use for this data set is the
     ________.
      a. mean
      b. median
       c. mode
      d. standard deviation

 2. A portfolio includes shares of United Airlines stock that were purchased at different times and different
     prices. Which measure is best to determine the average cost of the shares of the stock?
      a. mean
      b. median
       c. weighted mean
      d. standard deviation

 3. Standard deviation is a measure of the ________.
      a. center of a data set
      b. position of a data value in a data set
       c. area under a normal curve
      d. spread of a distribution

 4. How are standard deviation and variance related?
      a. The two measures are equal to one another.
      b. Variance is the square root of the standard deviation.
       c. Standard deviation is the square root of the variance.
      d. The two squared measures are equal to one another.

 5. Which of the following is the best definition of a z-score?
      a. the distance of a data value from the mean
      b. the number of standard deviations that a data value is from the mean
       c. the distance of a data value from the mean divided by the sample size
      d. the number of quartiles that a data value is from the mean

 6. The results of a standardized test indicate that you are in the 85th percentile. What is the best
     interpretation of this result?
      a. You scored in the top 85% of all students taking the test.
414 13 · Review Questions

      b. You scored in the top 15% of all students taking the test.
       c. Your score on the test is 85 when measured on a scale from 0 to 100.
      d. You scored in the bottom 15% of all students taking the test.

 7. The interquartile range is ________.
      a. the middle 50% of a data set
      b. the upper 50% of a data set
       c. the lower 50% of a data set
      d. equal to the median

 8. In a frequency distribution table, the sum of the relative frequencies must be equal to ________.
      a. the sample size
      b. 1, or 100%
       c. zero
      d. the standard deviation of the distribution

 9. A change in the standard deviation of a normal distribution will result in ________.
      a. a change in the location of the peak of the curve
      b. a change in the area under the curve
       c. a change in the shape of the curve
      d. a change that shifts the graph to the left or the right

10. When calculating an expected value, ________.
       a. the result should always be 1
      b. the result should always be a positive value
       c. the result should always be a negative value
      d. the result can be a positive or negative value

11. The area under a normal curve between a z-score of -2 and a z-score of +2 is ________.
       a. 0.68
      b. 0.95
       c. 0.997
      d. dependent on the mean and standard deviation

12. A scatter plot is a visualization for ________.
       a. univariate data only
      b. bivariate data only
       c. either univariate or bivariate data
      d. test scores

13. Which of the following is NOT a benefit of using the R statistical analysis tool?
       a. Additional features are constantly being added by the user community.
      b. It can be used on many computer platforms, including Mac, Windows, and Linux.
       c. It is free to download.
      d. Users pay an annual subscription fee.

     Review Questions

 1. Explain the considerations that determine whether the mean or the median is the best measure of central
     tendency for a data set.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         13 · Problems 415

2. Explain the difference between a mean and a weighted mean.
3. Explain why the standard deviation of a data set cannot be a negative value.
4. Explain what a negative z-score, a positive z-score, and a z-score of zero imply.
5. Explain how quartiles can be used to detect outliers in a data set.

Problems

1. You purchased 1,000 shares of a stock for $12 per share. Then, two months later, you purchased an
    additional 500 shares of the same stock at $9 per share. Calculate the weighted mean of the purchase
    price for the total of 1,500 shares.

2. You score a 60 on a biology test. The mean test grade is 70, and the standard deviation is 5. Calculate and
    interpret your corresponding z-score.

3. You score a 60 on a biology test. The mean test grade is 70, and the standard deviation is 5. What
    percentile does your grade correspond to?

4. A fast food restaurant has measured service time for customers waiting in line, and the service time
    follows an exponential distribution with a mean waiting time of 1.9 minutes. The restaurant has a
    guarantee that if customers wait in line for more than 5 minutes, their meal is free. What is the probability
    that a customer will receive a free meal?

5. The total value of your portfolio consists of approximately 65% stock assets, 25% bonds, and 10% cash
    equivalents. Historical returns have shown that stocks provide a return of 12%, bonds provide a return of
    3.5%, and cash savings provide a return of 1.5%. What is the expected value of the return on this portfolio?

6. The distribution of the average annual return of the S&P 500 over a 50-year time period follows a normal
    distribution with a mean rate of return of 10.5% and a standard deviation of 14.3%. What is the probability
    that an average annual return will fall between -3.8% and 24.8%?

7. Write a short R program to find the expected return for the data set in Table 13.16.

          Historical Return on   Associated
          United Airlines Stock  Probability

                       12%       15%

                       5%        35%

                       2%        25%

                       -5%       14%

                       -10%      11%

          Table 13.16

     Video Activity

Normal Distribution Stock Return Calculations

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/stock-return)
 1. Assume the return on stocks follows a normal distribution. Is it more likely that a stock will return between

     -1 and +1 standard deviations from the mean or between -2 and +2 standard deviations from the mean?
     Why?
416 13 · Video Activity

 2. Would an investor be likely to prefer a stock that has a smaller standard deviation for annual stock returns
     or one with a larger standard deviation for annual stock returns? Why?

Portfolio Weights
Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/port-weights)
 3. What are the reasons for calculating portfolio weights? What useful information does this provide to the

     investor?
 4. What are the advantages and disadvantages of the equal weighting approach and the market cap

     weighting approach for portfolio allocation strategy?

Access for free at openstax.org
14 · Why It Matters                                                                                                                     417

14
              Regression Analysis in Finance

Figure 14.1 Regression analysis is used in financial decision-making. (credit: modification of "Stock exchange" by Jack Sem/flickr, CC
BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline

  14.1 Correlation Analysis
  14.2 Linear Regression Analysis
  14.3 Best-Fit Linear Model
  14.4 Regression Applications in Finance
  14.5 Predictions and Prediction Intervals
  14.6 Use of R Statistical Analysis Tool for Regression Analysis

      Why It Matters

Correlation and regression analysis are used extensively in finance applications. Correlation analysis allows the
determination of a statistical relationship between two numeric quantities. Regression analysis can be used to
predict one quantity based on a second quantity, assuming there is a significant correlation between the two
quantities. For example, in finance, we use regression analysis to calculate the beta coefficient of a stock,
which represents the volatility of the stock versus overall market volatility, with volatility being a measure of
risk.

A business may want to establish a correlation between the amount the company spent on advertising versus
its recorded sales. If a strong enough correlation is established, then the business manager can predict sales
based on the amount spent on advertising for a given time period.

Finance professionals often use correlation analysis to predict future trends and mitigate risk in a stock
portfolio. For example, if two investments are strongly correlated, an investor might not want to have both
investments in a certain portfolio since the two investments would tend to move in the same directions during
up markets or down markets. To diversify a portfolio, an investor might seek investments that are not strongly
correlated with one another.

Regression analysis can be used to establish a mathematical equation that relates a dependent variable (such
as sales) to an independent variable (such as advertising expenditure). In this discussion, the focus will be on
418 14 · Regression Analysis in Finance

analyzing the relationship between one dependent variable and one independent variable, where the
relationship can be modeled using a linear equation. This type of analysis is called linear regression.

 14.1 Correlation Analysis

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Calculate a correlation coefficient.
  · Interpret a correlation coefficient.
  · Test for the significance of a correlation coefficient.

Calculate a Correlation Coefficient

In correlation analysis, we study the relationship between bivariate data, which is data collected on two
variables where the data values are paired with one another.

Correlation is the measure of association between two numeric variables. For example, we may be interested
to know if there is a correlation between bond prices and interest rates or between the age of a car and the
value of the car. To investigate the correlation between two numeric quantities, the first step is to create a
scatter plot that will graph the (x, y) ordered pairs. The independent, or explanatory, quantity is labeled as the
x-variable, and the dependent, or response, quantity is labeled as the y-variable.

For example, we may be interested to know if the price of Nike stock is correlated with the value of the S&P 500
(Standard & Poor's 500 stock market index). To investigate this, monthly data can be collected for Nike stock
prices and value of the S&P 500 for a period of time, and a scatter plot can be created and examined. A scatter
plot, or scatter diagram, is a graphical display intended to show the relationship between two variables. The
setup of the scatter plot is that one variable is plotted on the horizontal axis and the other variable is plotted
on the vertical axis. Each pair of data values is considered as an (x, y) point, and the various points are plotted
on the diagram. A visual inspection of the plot is then made to detect any patterns or trends on the scatter
diagram. Table 14.1 shows the relationship between the Nike stock price and its S&P value over a one-year
time period.

To assess linear correlation, the graphical trend of the data points is examined on the scatter plot to determine
if a straight-line pattern exists. If a linear pattern exists, the correlation may indicate either a positive or a
negative correlation. A positive correlation indicates that as the independent variable increases, the dependent
variable tends to increase as well, or, as the independent variable decreases, the dependent variable tends to
decrease (the two quantities move in the same direction). A negative correlation indicates that as the
independent variable increases, the dependent variable decreases, or, as the independent variable decreases,
the dependent variable increases (the two quantities move in opposite directions). If there is no relationship or
association between the two quantities, where one quantity changing does not affect the other quantity, we
conclude that there is no correlation between the two variables.

                                         Date                   Nike
                                               S&P 500 Stock Price

                                         4/1/2020 2,912.43  87.18
                                         5/1/2020 3,044.31  98.58
                                         6/1/2020 3,100.29  98.05

                                         Table 14.1 Nike Stock Price ($) and
                                         Value of S&P 500 over a One-Year
                                         Time Period (source: Yahoo! Finance)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                      14.1 · Correlation Analysis 419

Date                   Nike
      S&P 500 Stock Price

 7/1/2020 3,271.12   97.61
 8/1/2020 3,500.31  111.89
 9/1/2020 3,363.00  125.54
10/1/2020 3,269.96  120.08
11/1/2020 3,621.63  134.70
12/1/2020 3,756.07  141.47
 1/1/2021 3,714.24  133.59
 2/1/2021 3,811.15  134.78
 3/1/2021 3,943.34  140.45
3/12/2021 3,943.34  140.45

Table 14.1 Nike Stock Price ($) and
Value of S&P 500 over a One-Year
Time Period (source: Yahoo! Finance)

From the scatter plot in the Nike stock versus S&P 500 example (see Figure 14.2), we note that the trend
reflects a positive correlation in that as the value of the S&P 500 increases, the price of Nike stock tends to
increase as well.

                      Figure 14.2 Scatter Plot of Nike Stock Price ($) and Value of S&P 500 (data source: Yahoo! Finance)

When inspecting a scatter plot, it may be difficult to assess a correlation based on a visual inspection of the
graph alone. A more precise assessment of the correlation between the two quantities can be obtained by
calculating the numeric correlation coefficient (referred to using the symbol r).

The correlation coefficient, which was developed by statistician Karl Pearson in the early 1900s, is a measure
of the strength and direction of the correlation between the independent variable x and the dependent
variable y.

The formula for r is shown below; however, technology, such as Excel or the statistical analysis program R, is
typically used to calculate the correlation coefficient.
420 14 · Regression Analysis in Finance

where n refers to the number of data pairs and the symbol indicates to sum the x-values.

Table 14.2 provides a step-by-step procedure on how to calculate the correlation coefficient r.

                                                Step                          Representation in Symbols
1. Calculate the sum of the x-values.                                    n
2. Calculate the sum of the y-values.
3. Multiply each x-value by the corresponding y-value and calculate the
sum of these xy products.
4. Square each x-value and then calculate the sum of these squared
values.
5. Square each y-value and then calculate the sum of these squared
values.
6. Determine the value of n, which is the number of data pairs.

7. Use these results to then substitute into the formula for the
correlation coefficient.

Table 14.2 Steps for Calculating the Correlation Coefficient

Note that since r is calculated using sample data, r is considered a sample statistic used to measure the
strength of the correlation for the two population variables. Sample data indicates data based on a subset of
the entire population.

Given the complexity of this calculation, Excel or other software is typically used to calculate the correlation
coefficient.

The Excel command to calculate the correlation coefficient uses the following format:

                                                         =CORREL(A1:A10, B1:B10)

where A1:A10 are the cells containing the x-values and B1:B10 are the cells containing the y-values.
        Download the spreadsheet file (https://openstax.org/r/excel_exhibits) containing key Chapter 14 Excel
        exhibits.

Interpret a Correlation Coefficient

Once the value of r is calculated, this measurement provides two indicators for the correlation:

a. the strength of the correlation based on the value of r
b. the direction of the correlation based on the sign of r

The value of r gives us this information:

· The value of r is always between and :                      .

· The size of the correlation r indicates the strength of the linear relationship between the two variables.

Values of r close to or to indicate a stronger linear relationship.

· If  , there is no linear relationship between the two variables (no linear correlation).

· If  , there is perfect positive correlation.

· If  there is perfect negative correlation. In both of these cases, all the original data points lie on a

straight line.

The sign of r gives us this information:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                   14.1 · Correlation Analysis 421

· A positive value of r means that when x increases, y tends to increase, and when x decreases, y tends to
   decrease (positive correlation).

· A negative value of r means that when x increases, y tends to decrease, and when x decreases, y tends to
   increase (negative correlation).

LINK TO LEARNING

Correlation in Finance Applications

This video on correlation concepts (https://openstax.org/r/video_correlation) discusses them with a specific
focus on finance applications.

The Excel command used to find the value of the correlation coefficient for the Nike stock versus S&P 500
example (refer back to Table 14.1) is

                                                          =CORREL(B2:B14,C2:C14)

In this example, the value of is calculated by Excel to be  .

Since this is a positive value close to 1, we conclude that the relationship between Nike stock and the value of
the S&P 500 over this time period represents a strong, positive correlation.

The correlation coefficient r can also be determined using the statistical capability on the financial calculator:

  · Step 1 is to enter the data in the calculator (using the [DATA] function that is located above the 7 key).
  · Step 2 is to access the statistical results provided by the calculator (using the [STAT] function that is

      located above the 8 key) and scroll to the correlation coefficient results.

Follow the steps in Table 14.3 for calculating the correlation data for the data set of Nike stock price and value
of the S&P 500 shown previously.

Step                  Description                                Enter      Display

1 Enter [DATA] entry mode                                      2ND [DATA]   X01    0.00

2 Clear any previous data                                      2ND [CLR WORK] X01  0.00

3 Enter first x-value of 2912.43                               2912.43 ENTER X01 = 2,912.43

4 Move to next data entry                                                   Y01 = 1.00

5 Enter first y-value of 87.18                                 87.18 ENTER  Y01 = 87.18

6 Move to next data entry                                                   X02    0.00

7 Enter second x-value of 3044.31                              3044.31 ENTER X02 = 3,044.31

8 Move to next data entry                                                   Y02 = 1.00

9 Enter second y-value of 98.58                                98.58 ENTER  Y02 = 98.58

10 Move to next data entry                                                  X03    0.00

11 Continue to enter remaining data values

12 Enter [STAT] mode                                           2ND [STAT]

Table 14.3 Calculator Steps for Finding the Relationship between Nike Stock Price and Value of S&P 5001

1 The specific financial calculator in these examples is the Texas Instruments BA II Plus TM Professional model, but you can use
other financial calculators for these types of calculations.
422 14 · Regression Analysis in Finance

Step                                     Description           Enter      Display
                                                                      LIN
13 Press [SET] until LIN appears                      2ND [SET]
                                                                                  13.00
14 Move to 1st statistical result                                             3,480.86

15 Move to next statistical result                                                  0.93

16 Continue to scroll down until the value of r is displayed 

Table 14.3 Calculator Steps for Finding the Relationship between Nike Stock Price and Value of S&P 5001

From the statistical results shown on the calculator display, the correlation coefficient r is 0.93, which indicates
that the relationship between Nike stock and the value of the S&P 500 over this time period represents a
strong, positive correlation.

Note: A strong correlation does not suggest that x causes y or y causes x. We must remember that correlation
does not imply causation.

Test a Correlation Coefficient for Significance

The correlation coefficient, r, tells us about the strength and direction of the linear relationship between x and
y. The sample data are used to compute r, the correlation coefficient for the sample. If we had data for the
entire population (that is, all measurements of interest), we could find the population correlation coefficient,
which is labeled as the Greek letter  (pronounced "rho"). But because we have only sample data, we cannot
calculate the population correlation coefficient. The sample correlation coefficient, r, is our estimate of the
unknown population correlation coefficient.

  ·  = population correlation coefficient (unknown)
  · r = sample correlation coefficient (known; calculated from sample data)

An important step in the correlation analysis is to determine if the correlation is significant. By this, we are
asking if the correlation is strong enough to allow meaningful predictions for y based on values of x. One
method to test the significance of the correlation is to employ a hypothesis test. The hypothesis test lets us
decide whether the value of the population correlation coefficient  is close to zero or significantly different
from zero. We decide this based on the sample correlation coefficient r and the sample size n.

If the test concludes that the correlation coefficient is significantly different from zero, we say that the
correlation coefficient is significant.

  · Conclusion: There is sufficient evidence to conclude that there is a significant linear relationship between x
     and y variables because the correlation coefficient is significantly different from zero.

  · What the conclusion means: There is a significant linear relationship between the x and y variables. If the
      test concludes that the correlation coefficient is not significantly different from zero (it is close to zero), we
      say that the correlation coefficient is not significant.

A hypothesis test can be performed to test if the correlation is significant. A hypothesis test is a statistical
method that uses sample data to test a claim regarding the value of a population parameter. In this case, the
hypothesis test will be used to test the claim that the population correlation coefficient  is equal to zero.

Use these hypotheses when performing the hypothesis test:

  · Null hypothesis:
  · Alternate hypothesis:

The hypotheses can be stated in words as follows:

  · Null hypothesis : The population correlation coefficient is not significantly different from zero. There is
     not a significant linear relationship (correlation) between x and y in the population.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   14.1 · Correlation Analysis 423

  · Alternate hypothesis : The population correlation coefficient is significantly different from zero. There
     is a significant linear relationship (correlation) between x and y in the population.

A quick shorthand way to test correlations is the relationship between the sample size and the correlation. If
                  then this implies that the correlation between the two variables demonstrates that a linear

relationship exists and is statistically significant at approximately the 0.05 level of significance. As the formula
indicates, there is an inverse relationship between the sample size and the required correlation for significance
of a linear relationship. With only 10 observations, the required correlation for significance is 0.6325; for 30
observations, the required correlation for significance decreases to 0.3651; and at 100 observations, the
required level is only 0.2000.

NOTE:

  · If r is significant and the scatter plot shows a linear trend, the line can be used to predict the value of y for
     values of x that are within the domain of observed x-values.

  · If r is not significant OR if the scatter plot does not show a linear trend, the line should not be used for
      prediction.

  · If r is significant and the scatter plot shows a linear trend, the line may not be appropriate or reliable for
     prediction outside the domain of observed x-values in the data.

THINK IT THROUGH

Determining If a Correlation Is Significant

Suppose that the chief financial officer (CFO) of a corporation is investigating the correlation between stock
prices and unemployment rate over a period of 10 years and finds the correlation coefficient to be -0.68.
There are 10 (x, y) data points in the data set. Should the CFO conclude that the correlation is significant for
the relationship between stock prices and unemployment rate based on a level of significance of 0.05?

Solution:

When using a level of significance of 0.05, if       then this implies that the correlation between the

two variables demonstrates a linear relationship that is statistically significant at approximately the 0.05

level of significance. In this example, we check if  is greater than or equal to   where  .

Since      is approximately 0.632, this indicates that the absolute value of r of  is greater than ,

and thus the correlation is deemed as significant.

Correlations may be helpful in visualizing the data, but they are not appropriately used to explain a
relationship between two variables. Perhaps no single statistic is more misused than the correlation
coefficient. Citing correlations between health conditions and everything from place of residence to eye color
have the effect of implying a cause-and-effect relationship. This simply cannot be accomplished with a
correlation coefficient. The correlation coefficient is, of course, innocent of this misinterpretation. It is the duty
of analysts to use a statistic that is designed to test for cause-and-effect relationships and to report only those
results, if they are intending to make such a claim. The problem is that passing this more rigorous test is
difficult, therefore lazy and/or unscrupulous researchers fall back on correlations when they cannot make their
case legitimately.
424 14 · Regression Analysis in Finance

      14.2 Linear Regression Analysis

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Analyze a regression using the method of least squares and residuals.
         · Test the assumptions for linear regression.

      Method of Least Squares and Residuals

       Once the correlation coefficient has been calculated and a determination has been made that the correlation
       is significant, typically a regression model is then developed. In this discussion we will focus on linear
       regression, where a straight line is used to model the relationship between the two variables. Once a straight-
       line model is developed, this model can then be used to predict the value of the dependent variable for a
       specific value of the independent variable.
       Recall from algebra that the equation of a straight line is given by

       where m is the slope of the line and b is the y-intercept of the line.
       The slope measures the steepness of the line, and the y-intercept is that point on the y-axis where the graph
       crosses, or intercepts, the y-axis.
       In linear regression analysis, the equation of the straight line is written in a slightly different way using the
       model

       In this format, b is the slope of the line, and a is the y-intercept. The notation is called y-hat and is used to
       indicate a predicted value of the dependent variable y for a certain value of the independent variable x.
       If a line extends uphill from left to right, the slope is a positive value, and if the line extends downhill from left
       to right, the slope is a negative value. Refer to Figure 14.3.

Figure 14.3 Three Possible Graphs of              (a) If  , the line slopes upward to the right. (b) If  , the line is horizontal.

(c) If  , the line slopes downward to the right.

When generating the equation of a line in algebra using   , two (x, y) points were required to

generate the equation. However, in regression analysis, all (x, y) points in the data set will be utilized to

develop the linear regression model.

The first step in any regression analysis is to create the scatter plot. Then proceed to calculate the correlation
coefficient r, and check this value for significance. If we think that the points show a linear relationship, we
would like to draw a line on the scatter plot. This line can be calculated through a process called linear
regression. However, we only calculate a regression line if one of the variables helps to explain or predict the
other variable. If x is the independent variable and y the dependent variable, then we can use a regression line
to predict y for a given value of x.

As an example of a regression equation, assume that a correlation exists between the monthly amount spent

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              14.2 · Linear Regression Analysis 425

on advertising and the monthly revenue for a Fortune 500 company. After collecting (x, y) data for a certain
time period, the company determines the regression equation is of the form

where x represents the monthly amount spent on advertising (in thousands of dollars) and  represents the
monthly revenues for the company (in thousands of dollars).

A scatter plot of the (x, y) data is shown in Figure 14.4.

Figure 14.4 Scatter Plot of Revenue versus Advertising for a Fortune 500 Company ($000s)

The Fortune 500 company would like to predict the monthly revenue if its executives decide to spend $150,000

in advertising next month. To determine the estimate of monthly revenue, let  in the regression

equation and calculate a corresponding value for :

This predicted value of y indicates that the anticipated revenue would be $18,646,700, given the advertising
spend of $150,000.

Notice that from past data, there may have been a month where the company actually did spend $150,000 on
advertising, and thus the company may have an actual result for the monthly revenue. This actual, or
observed, amount can be compared to the prediction from the linear regression model to calculate a residual.

A residual is the difference between an observed y-value and the predicted y-value obtained from the linear

regression equation. As an example, assume that in a previous month, the actual monthly revenue for an

advertising spend of $150,000 was $19,200,000, and thus  . The residual for this data point can be

calculated as follows:

Notice that residuals can be positive, negative, or zero. If the observed y-value exactly matches the predicted
y-value, then the residual will be zero. If the observed y-value is greater than the predicted y-value, then the
residual will be a positive value. If the observed y-value is less than the predicted y-value, then the residual will
be a negative value.

When formulating the linear regression line of best fit to the points on the scatter plot, the mathematical
426 14 · Regression Analysis in Finance

       analysis generates a linear equation where the sum of the squared residuals is minimized. This analysis is
       referred to as the method of least squares. The result is that the analysis generates a linear equation that is
       the "best fit" to the points on the scatter plot, in the sense that the line minimizes the differences between the
       predicted values and observed values for y.

       THINK IT THROUGH
       Calculating a Residual

         Suppose that the chief financial officer of a corporation has created a linear model for the relationship
         between the company stock and interest rates. When interest rates are at 5%, the company stock has a
         value of $94. Using the linear model, when interest rates are at 5%, the model predicts the value of the
         company stock to be $99. Calculate the residual for this data point.
         Solution:
         A residual is the difference between an observed y-value and the predicted y-value obtained from the linear
         regression equation

       The goal in the regression analysis is to determine the coefficients a and b in the following regression
       equation:

       Once the (x, y) has been collected, the slope (b) and y-intercept (a) can be calculated using the following
       formulas:

       where n refers to the number of data pairs and indicates sum of the x-values.
       Notice that the formula for the y-intercept requires the use of the slope result (b), and thus the slope should
       be calculated first and the y-intercept should be calculated second.
       When making predictions for y, it is always important to plot a scatter diagram first. If the scatter plot indicates
       that there is a linear relationship between the variables, then it is reasonable to use a best-fit line to make
       predictions for y, given x within the domain of x-values in the sample data, but not necessarily for x-values
       outside that domain.
       Note: Computer spreadsheets, statistical software, and many calculators can quickly calculate the best-fit line
       and create the graphs. The calculations tend to be tedious if done by hand.

      Assumptions for Linear Regression

       Testing the significance of the correlation coefficient requires that certain assumptions about the data are
       satisfied. The premise of this test is that the data are a sample of observed points taken from a larger
       population. We have not examined the entire population because it is not possible or feasible to do so. We are
       examining the sample to draw a conclusion about whether the linear relationship that we see between x and y
       in the sample data provides strong enough evidence that we can conclude that there is a linear relationship

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                    14.3 · Best-Fit Linear Model 427

between x and y in the population.
The regression line equation that we calculate from the sample data gives the best-fit line for our particular
sample. We want to use this best-fit line for the sample as an estimate of the best-fit line for the population
(Figure 14.5). Examining the scatter plot and testing the significance of the correlation coefficient helps us
determine if it is appropriate to do this.
These are the assumptions underlying the test of significance:
1. There is a linear relationship in the population that models the average value of y for varying values of x.

     In other words, the expected value of y for each particular value lies on a straight line in the population.
      (We do not know the equation for the line for the population. Our regression line from the sample is our
      best estimate of this line in the population.)
2. The y-values for any particular x-value are normally distributed about the line. This implies that there are
     more y-values scattered closer to the line than are scattered farther away. Assumption (1) implies that
     these normal distributions are centered on the line: the means of these normal distributions of y-values lie
      on the line.
3. The standard deviations of the population y-values about the line are equal for each value of x. In other
     words, each of these normal distributions of y-values has the same shape and spread about the line.
4. The residual errors are mutually independent (no pattern).
5. The data are produced from a well-designed, random sample or randomized experiment.

Figure 14.5 Best-Fit Line The y-values for each x-value are normally distributed about the line with the same standard deviation. For
each x-value, the mean of the y-values lies on the regression line. More y-values lie near the line than are scattered further away
from the line.

 14.3 Best-Fit Linear Model

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Calculate the slope and y-intercept for a linear regression model using technology.
  · Interpret and apply the slope and y-intercepts.

Calculate the Slope and y-Intercept for a Linear Regression Model Using Technology

Once a correlation has been deemed as significant, a best-fit linear regression model is developed. The goal
in the regression analysis is to determine the coefficients a and b in the following regression equation:

The slope (b) and y-intercept (a) can be calculated using the following formulas:
428 14 · Regression Analysis in Finance

These formulas can be quite cumbersome, especially for a significant number of data pairs, and thus
technology is often used (such as Excel, a calculator, R statistical software, etc.).

Using Excel: To calculate the slope and y-intercept of the linear model, start by entering the (x, y) data in two
columns in Excel. Then the Excel commands =SLOPE and =INTERCEPT can be used to calculate the slope and
intercept, respectively.

The following data set will be used as an example: the monthly amount spent on advertising and the monthly
revenue for a Fortune 500 company for 12 months (data is shown in Table 14.4).

                                                                    Advertising
                                                        Month Expenditure Revenue

                                         Jan  49 12,210

                                         Feb  145 17,590

                                         Mar  57 13,215

                                         Apr  153 19,200

                                         May  92 14,600

                                         Jun  83 14,100

                                         Jul  117 17,100

                                         Aug  142 18,400

                                         Sep  69 14,100

                                         Oct  106 15,500

                                         Nov  109 16,300

                                         Dec  121 17,020

                                         Table 14.4 Revenue versus
                                         Advertising for Fortune 500
                                         Company ($000s)

To calculate the slope of the regression model, use the Excel command

                                              =SLOPE(y-data range, x-data range)

It's important to note that this Excel command expects that the y-data range is entered first and the x-data
range is entered second. Since revenue depends on amount spent on advertising, revenue is considered the
y-variable and amount spent on advertising is considered the x-variable. Notice the y-data is contained in cells
C2 through C13 and the x-data is contained in cells B2 through B13. Thus the Excel command for slope would
be entered as

                                                          =SLOPE(C2:C13, B2:B13)

In the same way, the Excel command to calculate the y-intercept of the regression model is

                                           =INTERCEPT(y-data range, x-data range)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          14.3 · Best-Fit Linear Model 429

For the data set shown in the above table, the Excel command would be
                                                       =INTERCEPT(C2:C13, B2:B13)

The results are shown in Figure 14.6, where

Figure 14.6 Revenue versus Advertising for Fortune 500 Company ($000s) Showing Slope and y-Intercept Calculation in Excel

Based on this, the regression equation can be written as

where x represents the amount spent on advertising (in thousands of dollars) and y represents the amount of
revenue (in thousands of dollars).

Using a Financial Calculator

The financial calculator provides the slope and y-intercept for the linear regression model once the (x, y) data
is inputted into the calculator.

Follow the steps in Table 14.5 for calculating the slope and y-intercept for the data set of amounts spent on
advertising and revenue shown previously.

Step                          Description                                          Enter       Display

1 Enter [DATA] entry mode                                  2ND [DATA]                     X01    0.00

2 Clear any previous data                                  2ND [CLR WORK] X01                    0.00

3 Enter first x-value of 49                                49 ENTER                       X01 = 49.00

4 Move to next data entry                                                                 Y01 =  1.00

Table 14.5 Calculator Steps for the Slope and y-Intercept
430 14 · Regression Analysis in Finance

Step                                     Description           Enter         Display

5 Enter first y-value of 12210                             12210 ENTER  Y01 = 12,210.00

6 Move to next data entry                                               X02    0.00

7 Enter second x-value of 145                              145 ENTER    X02 = 145.00

8 Move to next data entry                                               Y02 =  1.00

9 Enter second y-value of 17590                            17590ENTER   Y02 = 17,590.00

10 Move to next data entry                                              X03    0.00

11 Continue to enter remaining data values

12 Enter [STAT] mode                                       2ND [STAT]

13 Press [SET] until LIN appears                           2ND [SET]    LIN
                                                                                      12.00
14 Move to 1st statistical result                          
                                                                                    103.58
15 Move to next statistical result                                                9,376.70

16 Continue to scroll down until the value of a is displayed                          61.80

17 Continue to scroll down until the value of b is displayed 

Table 14.5 Calculator Steps for the Slope and y-Intercept

From the statistical results shown on the calculator display, the slope b is 61.8 and the y-intercept a is 9,367.7.
Based on this, the regression equation can be written as

Interpret and Apply the Slope and y-Intercept

The slope of the line, b, describes how changes in the variables are related. It is important to interpret the
slope of the line in the context of the situation represented by the data. You should be able to write a sentence
interpreting the slope in plain English.

Interpretation of the Slope

The slope of the best-fit line tells us how the dependent variable (y) changes for every one unit increase in the
independent (x) variable, on average.

In the previous example, the linear regression model for the monthly amount spent on advertising and the
monthly revenue for a Fortune 500 company for 12 months was generated as follows:

Since the slope was determined to be 61.8, the company can interpret this to mean that for every $1,000
dollars spent on advertising, on average, this will result in an increase in revenues of $61,800.
The intercept of the regression equation is the corresponding y-value when.
Interpretation of the Intercept
The intercept of the best-fit line tells us the expected mean value of y in the case where the x-variable is equal
to zero.
However, in many scenarios it may not make sense to have the x-variable equal zero, and in these cases, the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                               14.4 · Regression Applications in Finance 431

intercept does not have any meaning in the context of the problem. In other examples, the x-value of zero is
outside the range of the x-data that was collected. In this case, we should not assign any interpretation to the
y-intercept.

In the previous example, the range of data collected for the x-variable was from $49 to $153 spent per month
on advertising. Since this interval does not include an x-value of zero, we would not provide any interpretation
for the intercept.

 14.4 Regression Applications in Finance

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Calculate the regression model for a single independent variable as applied to financial forecasting.
  · Extract measures of slope and intercept from regression analysis in financial applications.

Regression Model for a Single Independent Variable

Regression analysis is used extensively in finance-related applications. Many typical applications involve
determining if there is a correlation between various stock market indices such as the S&P 500, the Dow Jones
Industrial Average (DJIA), and the Russell 2000 index.

As an example, suppose we would like to determine if there is a correlation between the Russell 2000 index
and the DJIA. Does the value of the Russell 2000 index depend on the value of the DJIA? Is it possible to predict
the value of the Russell 2000 index for a certain value of the DJIA? We can explore these questions using
regression analysis.

Table 14.6 shows a summary of monthly closing prices of the DJIA and the Russell 2000 for a 12-month time
period. We consider the DJIA to be the independent variable and the Russell 2000 index to be the dependent
variable.

Monthly Close DJIA Russell 2000

1-Apr-21 34,200.67  2,262.67

1-Mar-21 32,981.55  2,220.52

1-Feb-21 30,932.37  2,201.05

1-Jan-21 29,982.62  2,073.64

1-Dec-20 30,606.48  1,974.86

1-Nov-20 29,638.64  1,819.82

1-Oct-20 26,501.60  1,538.48

1-Sep-20 27,781.70  1,507.69

1-Aug-20 28,430.05  1,561.88

1-Jul-20 26,428.32  1,480.43

1-Jun-20 25,812.88  1,441.37

1-May-20 25,383.11  1,394.04

Table 14.6 Monthly Closing Prices of the DJIA
and the Russell 2000 for a 12-Month Time
Period (source: Yahoo! Finance)

The first step is to create a scatter plot to determine if the data points appear to follow a linear pattern. The
scatter plot is shown in Figure 14.7. The scatter plot clearly shows a linear pattern; the next step is to calculate
432 14 · Regression Analysis in Finance

the correlation coefficient and determine if the correlation is significant.

· Using the Excel command =CORREL, the correlation coefficient is calculated to be 0.947. This value of the

correlation coefficient is significant using the test for significance referenced earlier in Correlation

Analysis.

· Using the Excel commands =SLOPE and =INTERCEPT, the value of the slope and y-intercept are calculated

as 0.11 and          , respectively, when rounded to two decimal places.

The Excel output is shown below:

                                         =CORREL(C3:C14,B3:B14): 0.947

                                         =SLOPE(C3:C14,B3:B14): 0.113

                                         =INTERCEPT(C3:C14,B3:B14): -1,496.340

Figure 14.7 Scatter Plot for Monthly Closing Prices of the DJIA versus the Russell 2000 for a 12-Month Time Period (data
source: Yahoo! Finance)

Based on these results, the corresponding linear regression model is

Assume the DJIA has reached a value of 32,000. Predict the corresponding value of the Russell 2000 index. To

determine this, substitute the value of the independent variable,             (this is the given value of the

DJIA), and calculate the corresponding value for the dependent variable, which is the predicted value for the

Russell 2000 index:

Thus the predicted value for the Russell 2000 index is approximately 2,024 when the DJIA reached a value of
32,000.

Measures of Slope and Intercept from Regression Analysis

An important application of regression analysis is to determine the systematic risk for a particular stock, which
is referred to as beta. A stock's beta is a measure of the volatility of the stock compared to a benchmark such
as the S&P 500 index. If a stock has more volatility compared to the benchmark, then the stock will have a beta
greater than 1.0. If a stock has less volatility compared to the benchmark, then the stock will have a beta less

Access for free at openstax.org
                                              14.4 · Regression Applications in Finance 433

than 1.0.

Beta can be determined as the slope of the regression line when the stock returns are plotted versus the
returns for the benchmark, such as the S&P 500. As an example, consider the calculation for beta of Nike stock
based on monthly returns of Nike stock versus monthly returns for the S&P 500 over the time period from May
2020 to March 2021. The monthly return data is shown in Table 14.7.

                               S&P    Nike    Nike

           Date  S&P 500 Monthly Stock Monthly
                             Return (%) Price ($) Return (%)

            4/1/2020 2,912.43   N/A    87.18   N/A
            5/1/2020 3,044.31   0.05   98.58   0.13
            6/1/2020 3,100.29   0.02   98.05  -0.01
            7/1/2020 3,271.12   0.06   97.61   0.00
            8/1/2020 3,500.31   0.07  111.89   0.15
            9/1/2020 3,363.00  -0.04  125.54   0.12
           10/1/2020 3,269.96  -0.03  120.08  -0.04
           11/1/2020 3,621.63   0.11  134.70   0.12
           12/1/2020 3,756.07   0.04  141.47   0.05
            1/1/2021 3,714.24  -0.01  133.59  -0.06
            2/1/2021 3,811.15   0.03  134.78   0.01
            3/1/2021 3,943.34   0.03  140.45   0.04
           3/12/2021 3,943.34   0.00  140.45   0.00

           Table 14.7 Monthly Returns of Nike Stock versus Monthly
           Returns for the S&P 500 (source: Yahoo! Finance)

The scatter plot that graphs S&P monthly return versus Nike monthly return is shown in Figure 14.8.
434 14 · Regression Analysis in Finance

        Figure 14.8 Scatter Plot of Monthly Returns of Nike Stock versus Monthly Returns for the S&P 500 ($) (data source: Yahoo!
        Finance)

       The slope of the regression line is 0.83, obtained by using the =SLOPE command in Excel.
                                                                  =SLOPE (E4:E15,C4:C15)
                                                                           =0.830681658

       This indicates the value of beta for Nike stock is 0.83, which indicates that Nike stock had lower volatility versus
       the S&P 500 for the time period of interest.

      14.5 Predictions and Prediction Intervals

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Calculate predictions for the dependent variable using the regression model.
         · Generate prediction intervals based on a prediction for the dependent variable.

      Predicting the Dependent Variable Using the Regression Model

       A key aspect of generating the linear regression model is to use the model for predictions, provided the
       correlation is significant. To generate predictions or forecasts using the linear regression model, substitute the
       value of the independent variable (x) in the regression equation and solve the equation for the dependent
       variable (y).
       In a previous example, the linear regression equation was generated to relate the amount of monthly revenue
       for a Fortune 500 company to the amount of monthly advertising spend. From the previous example, it was
       determined that the regression equation can be written as

       where x represents the amount spent on advertising (in thousands of dollars) and y represents the amount of

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                          14.5 · Predictions and Prediction Intervals 435

revenue (in thousands of dollars).

Let's assume the Fortune 500 company would like to predict the monthly revenue for a month where it plans

to spend $80,000 for advertising. To determine the estimate of monthly revenue, let            in the regression

equation and calculate a corresponding value for :

This predicted value of y indicates that the forecasted revenue would be $14,320,700, assuming an advertising
spend of $80,000.

  · Excel can provide this forecasted value directly using the =FORECAST command.
  · To use this command, enter the value of the independent variable x, followed by the cell range for the

     y-data and the cell range for the x-data, as follows: =FORECAST(X_VALUE, Range of Y-DATA, Range
      of X-DATA)

  · Using this Excel command, the forecasted value for the revenue is $14,320.52 when the advertising spend
      is $80 (in thousands of dollars) (see Figure 14.9). (Note: The discrepancy in the more precise Excel result
      and the formula result is due to rounding in interim calculations.)

Figure 14.9 Revenue versus Advertising for Fortune 500 Company ($000s) Showing FORECAST Command in Excel

A word of caution when predicting values for y: it is generally recommended to only predict values for y using
values of x that are in the original range of the data collection.

As an example, assume we have developed a linear model to predict the height of male children based on

their age. We have collected data for the age range from  years old to  years old, and we have

confirmed that the scatter plot shows a linear trend and that the correlation is significant.

It would be erroneous to use this model to predict the height of a 25-year-old male since      is outside the

range of the x-data, which was from 3 to 10 years old. The reason this is not recommended is that a linear

pattern cannot be assumed to continue beyond the x-value of 10 years old unless some data collection has

occurred at ages greater than 10 to confirm that the linear pattern is consistent for x-values beyond 10 years
436 14 · Regression Analysis in Finance

old.

Generating Prediction Intervals

One important value of an estimated regression equation is its ability to predict the effects on y of a change in
one or more values of the independent variables. The value of this is obvious. Careful policy cannot be made
without estimates of the effects that may result. Indeed, it is the desire for particular results that drive the
formation of most policy. Regression models can be, and have been, invaluable aids in forming such policies.

Remember that point estimates do not carry a particular level of probability, or level of confidence, because
points have no "width" above which there is an area to measure. There are actually two different approaches
to the issue of developing estimates of changes in the independent variable (or variables) on the dependent
variable. The first approach wishes to measure the expected mean value of y from a specific change in the
value of x.

The second approach to estimate the effect of a specific value of x on y treats the event as a single experiment:
you choose x and multiply it times the coefficient, and that provides a single estimate of y. Because this
approach acts as if there were a single experiment, the variance that exists in the parameter estimate is larger
than the variance associated with the expected value approach.

The conclusion is that we have two different ways to predict the effect of values of the independent variable(s)
on the dependent variable, and thus we have two different intervals. Both are correct answers to the question
being asked, but there are two different questions. To avoid confusion, the first case where we are asking for
the expected value of the mean of the estimated y is called a confidence interval. The second case, where we
are asking for the estimate of the impact on the dependent variable y of a single experiment using a value of x,
is called the prediction interval.

The prediction interval for an individual y for  can be calculated as

where se is the standard deviation of the error term, sx is the standard deviation of the x-variable, and  is

the critical value of the t-distribution at the  confidence level.

Tabulated values of the t-distribution are available in online references such as the Engineering Statistics
Handbook (https://openstax.org/r/engineering_handbook). The mathematical computations for prediction
intervals are complex, and usually the calculations are performed using software. The formula above can be
implemented in Excel to create a 95% prediction interval for the forecast for monthly revenue when

                  is spent on monthly advertising. Figure 14.10 shows the detailed calculations in Excel to arrive at a
95% prediction interval of (13,270.95, 15,370.09) for the monthly revenue. (The commands refer to the Excel
data table shown in Figure 14.9.)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                              14.5 · Predictions and Prediction Intervals 437

                                      Figure 14.10 Calculations for 95% Prediction Interval for Monthly Revenue

This prediction interval can be interpreted as follows: there is 95% confidence that when the amount spent on
monthly advertising is $80,000, the corresponding monthly revenue will be between $13,270.95 and
$15,370.09.
Various computer regression software packages provide programs within the regression functions to provide
answers to inquiries of estimated predicted values of y given various values chosen for the x-variable(s). For
example, the statistical program R provides these prediction intervals directly. It is important to know just
which interval is being tested in the computer package because the difference in the size of the standard
deviations will change the size of the interval estimated. This is shown in Figure 14.11.

                    Figure 14.11 Prediction and Confidence Intervals for Regression Equation at 95% Confidence Level

Figure 14.11 shows visually the difference the standard deviation makes in the size of the estimated intervals.
The confidence interval, measuring the expected value of the dependent variable, is smaller than the
prediction interval for the same level of confidence. The expected value method assumes that the experiment
is conducted multiple times rather than just once, as in the other method. The logic here is similar, although
not identical, to that discussed when developing the relationship between the sample size and the confidence
interval using the central limit theorem. There, as the number of experiments increased, the distribution
438 14 · Regression Analysis in Finance

       narrowed, and the confidence interval became tighter around the expected value of the mean.
       It is also important to note that the intervals around a point estimate are highly dependent upon the range of
       data used to estimate the equation, regardless of which approach is being used for prediction. Remember that
       all regression equations go through the point of means--that is, the mean value of y and the mean values of
       all independent variables in the equation. As the value of x gets further and further from the (x, y) point
       corresponding to the mean value of x and the mean value of y, the width of the estimated interval around the
       point estimate increases. Choosing values of x beyond the range of the data used to estimate the equation
       poses an even greater danger of creating estimates with little use, very large intervals, and risk of error. Figure
       14.12 shows this relationship.

                                  Figure 14.12 Confidence Interval for an Individual Value of x, , at 95% Confidence Level

       Figure 14.12 demonstrates the concern for the quality of the estimated interval, whether it is a prediction
       interval or a confidence interval. As the value chosen to predict y, in the graph, is further from the central
       weight of the data, , we see the interval expand in width even while holding constant the level of confidence.
       This shows that the precision of any estimate will diminish as one tries to predict beyond the largest weight of
       the data and most certainly will degrade rapidly for predictions beyond the range of the data. Unfortunately,
       this is just where most predictions are desired. They can be made, but the width of the confidence interval may
       be so large as to render the prediction useless.

      14.6 Use of R Statistical Analysis Tool for Regression Analysis

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Generate correlation coefficients using the R statistical tool.
         · Generate linear regression models using the R statistical tool.

      Generate Correlation Coefficients Using the R Statistical Tool

       R is an open-source statistical analysis tool that is widely used in the finance industry. R is available as a free
       program and provides an integrated suite of functions for data analysis, graphing, and statistical
       programming. R provides many functions and capabilities for regression analysis.
       Recall that most calculations in R are handled via functions.
       The typical method for using functions in statistical applications is to first create a vector of data values. There
       are several ways to create vectors in R. For example, the c function is often used to combine values into a
       vector. For example, this R command will generate a vector called salaries, containing the data values 40,000,
       50,000, 75,000, and 92,000:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  14.6 · Use of R Statistical Analysis Tool for Regression Analysis 439

> salaries <- c(40000, 50000, 75000, 92000)

To calculate the correlation coefficient r, we use the R command called cor.
As an example, consider the data set in Table 14.8, which tracks the return on the S&P 500 versus return on
Coca-Cola stock for a seven-month time period.

                                                                     S&P 500 Coca-Cola
                                                        Month Monthly Monthly

                                                                   Return (%) Return (%)

Jan  8   6

Feb  1   0

Mar  0   -2

Apr  2   1

May  -3  -1

Jun  7   8

Jul  4   2

Table 14.8 Monthly Returns of Coca-
Cola Stock versus Monthly Returns
for the S&P 500

Create two vectors in R, one vector for the S&P 500 returns and a second vector for Coca-Cola returns:
          > SP500 <- c(8,1,0,2,-3,7,4)
          > CocaCola <- c(6,0,-2,1,-1,8,2)

The R command called cor returns the correlation coefficient for the x-data vector and y-data vector:
          > cor(SP500, CocaCola)

Generate Linear Regression Models Using the R Statistical Tool

To create a linear model in R, assuming the correlation is significant, the command lm (for linear model) will
provide the slope and y-intercept for the linear regression equation.
The format of the R command is

          lm(dependent_variable_vector ~ independent_variable_vector)

Notice the use of the tilde symbol as the separator between the dependent variable vector and the
independent variable vector.

We use the returns on Coca-Cola stock as the dependent variable and the returns on the S&P 500 as the
independent variable, and thus the R command would be
440 14 · Regression Analysis in Finance                       and the value of the slope as 0.8641. Based on

                  > lm(CocaCola ~ SP500)
                  Call:
                  lm(formula = CocaCola ~ SP500)
                  Coefficients:
                  (Intercept) SP500
                  -0.3453 0.8641

       The R output provides the value of the y-intercept as
       this, the linear model would be

where x represents the value of S&P 500 return and y represents the value of Coca-Cola stock return.
The results can also be saved as a formula and called "model" using the following R command. To obtain more
detailed results for the linear regression, the summary command can be used, as follows:

          > model <- lm(CocaCola ~ SP500)
          > summary(model)
          Call:
          lm(formula = CocaCola ~ SP500)
          Residuals:
          1 2 3 4 5 6 7
          -0.5672 -0.5188 -1.6547 -0.3828 1.9375 2.2969 -1.1109
          Coefficients:
          Estimate Std. Error t value Pr(>|t|)
          (Intercept) -0.3453 0.7836 -0.441 0.67783
          SP500 0.8641 0.1734 4.984 0.00416 **
          ---
          Signif. codes: 0 `***' 0.001 `**' 0.01 `*' 0.05 `.' 0.1 ` ' 1
          Residual standard error: 1.658 on 5 degrees of freedom

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                14.6 · Use of R Statistical Analysis Tool for Regression Analysis 441

          Multiple R-squared: 0.8325, Adjusted R-squared: 0.7989
          F-statistic: 24.84 on 1 and 5 DF, p-value: 0.004161

In this output, the y-intercept and slope is given, as well as the residuals for each x-value. The output includes
additional statistical details regarding the regression analysis.
Predicted values and prediction intervals can also be generated within R.
First, we can create a structure in R called a data frame to hold the values of the independent variable for
which we want to generate a prediction. For example, we would like to generate the predicted return for Coca-
Cola stock, given that the return for the S&P 500 is 6.
We use the R command called predict.
To generate a prediction for the linear regression equation called model, using the data frame where the value
of the S&P 500 is 6, the R commands will be

          > a <- data.frame(SP500=6)
          > predict(model, a)
          1
          4.839062

The output from the predict command indicates that the predicted return for Coca-Cola stock will be 4.8%
when the return for the S&P 500 is 6%.
We can extend this analysis to generate a 95% prediction interval for this result by using the following R
command, which adds an option to the predict command to generate a prediction interval:

          > predict(model,a, interval="predict")
          fit lwr upr
          1 4.839062 0.05417466 9.62395

Thus the 95% prediction interval for Coca-Cola return is (0.05%, 9.62%) when the return for the S&P 500 is 6%.
442 14 · Summary

Summary

14.1 Correlation Analysis

Correlation is the measure of association between two numeric variables. A correlation coefficient called r is
used to assess the strength and direction of the correlation. The value of r is always between and . The
size of the correlation r indicates the strength of the linear relationship between the two variables. Values of r
close to or to indicate a stronger linear relationship. A positive value of r means that when x increases, y
tends to increase and when x decreases, y tends to decrease (positive correlation). A negative value of r means
that when x increases, y tends to decrease and when x decreases, y tends to increase (negative correlation).

14.2 Linear Regression Analysis

Linear regression analysis uses a straight-line fit to model the relationship between the two variables. Once a
straight-line model is developed, this model can then be used to predict the value of the dependent variable
for a specific value of the independent variable. Two parameters are calculated for the linear model, the slope
of the best-fit line and the y-intercept of the best-fit line. The method of least squares is used to generate
these parameters; this method is based on minimizing the squared differences between the predicted values
and observed values for y.

14.3 Best-Fit Linear Model

Once a correlation has been deemed significant, a linear regression model is developed. The goal in the

regression analysis is to determine the coefficients a and b in the following regression equation:       .

Typically some technology, such as Excel, R statistical tool, or a calculator, is used to generate the coefficients a

and b since manual calculations are cumbersome.

14.4 Regression Applications in Finance

Regression analysis is used extensively in finance-related applications. Many typical applications involve
determining if there is a correlation between various stock market indices such as the S&P 500, the DJIA, and
the Russell 2000 index. The procedure is to first generate a scatter plot to determine if a visual trend is
observed, then calculate a correlation coefficient and check for significance. If the correlation coefficient is
significant, a linear model can then be generated and used for predictions.

14.5 Predictions and Prediction Intervals

A key aspect of generating the linear regression model is to then use the model for predictions, provided that
the correlation is significant. To generate predictions or forecasts using the linear regression model, substitute
the value of the independent variable (x) in the regression equation and solve the equation for the dependent
variable (y). When making predictions using the linear model, it is generally recommended to only predict
values for y using values of x that are in the original range of the data collection.

14.6 Use of R Statistical Analysis Tool for Regression Analysis

R is an open-source statistical analysis tool that is widely used in the finance industry and can be found online
(https://openstax.org/r/finance_industry). R provides an integrated suite of functions for data analysis,
graphing, and correlation and regression analysis. R is increasingly being used as a data analysis and statistical
tool because it is an open-source language and additional features are constantly being added by the user
community. The tool can be used on many different computing platforms.

Key Terms

best-fit linear regression model an equation of the form  that provides the best-fit straight line

to the (x, y) data points

beta the measure of the volatility of a stock as compared to a benchmark such as the S&P 500 index

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                    14 · Multiple Choice 443

correlation the measure of association between two numeric variables
correlation coefficient a measure of the strength and direction of the linear relationship between two

    variables
linear correlation a measure of the association between two variables that exhibit an approximate straight-

    line fit when plotted on a scatter plot
method of least squares a mathematical method to generate a linear equation that is the "best fit" to the

    points on the scatter plot in the sense that the line minimizes the differences between the predicted values
   and observed values for y
prediction a forecast for the dependent variable based on a specific value of the independent variable
    generated using the linear model
residual the difference between an observed y-value and the predicted y-value obtained from the linear
    regression equation
scatter plot (scatter diagram) graphical display that shows values of the independent variable plotted on
   the x-axis and values of the dependent variable plotted on the y-axis

    Multiple Choice

1. Two correlation coefficients are compared: Correlation Coefficient A is 0.83. Correlation Coefficient B is
             . Which correlation coefficient represents the stronger linear relationship?

     a. Correlation Coefficient A
     b. Correlation Coefficient B
     c. equal strength
     d. not enough information to determine

2. A data set containing 10 pairs of (x, y) data points is analyzed, and the correlation coefficient is calculated

to be 0.58. Does this value of      indicate a significant or nonsignificant correlation?

a. significant

b. nonsignificant

c. neither significant nor nonsignificant

d. not enough information to determine

3. A linear regression model is developed, and for  , the corresponding predicted y-value is 22.7. The

actual observed value for       is         . Is the residual for this data point positive, negative, or zero?

a. positive

b. negative

c. zero

d. not enough information to determine

4. A linear model is developed for the relationship between salary of finance professionals and years of
    experience. The data was collected based on years of experience ranging from 1 to 15. Assuming the
    correlation is significant, should the linear model be used to predict the salary for a person with 25 years
    of experience?
     a. It is acceptable to predict the salary for a person with 25 years of experience.
     b. A linear model cannot be created for these two variables.
     c. It is not recommended to predict the salary for a person with 25 years of experience.
     d. There is not enough information to determine the answer.

5. Which of the following is the best interpretation for the slope of the linear regression model?
     a. The slope is the expected mean value of y when the x-variable is equal to zero.
     b. The slope indicates the change in y for every unit increase in x.
444 14 · Review Questions

c. The slope indicates the strength of the linear relationship between x and y.
d. The slope indicates the direction of the linear relationship between x and y.

6. A linear model is developed for the relationship between the annual salary of finance professionals and

years of experience, and the following is the linear model                            . Which is the correct

interpretation of this linear model?

a.

b.

c.

d.

7. Which of the following is the correct sequence of steps needed to create a linear regression model?
     a. create scatter plot, calculate correlation coefficient, check for significance, create linear model
     b. create linear model, calculate correlation coefficient, check for significance, create scatter plot
     c. check for significance, create linear model, calculate correlation coefficient, create scatter plot
     d. create scatter plot, check for significance, create linear model, calculate correlation coefficient

8. A linear model is developed for the relationship between the annual salary of finance professionals and

years of experience, and the linear model is:               The correlation is determined to be

significant. Predict the salary for a finance professional with 7 years of experience.

a. $55,010

b. $60,000

c. $62,000

d. $125,000

9. As predictions are made for x-values that are further and further away from the mean of x, which is true
    about the prediction intervals for these x-values?
     a. The prediction intervals will become smaller.
     b. The prediction intervals will become larger.
     c. The prediction intervals will remain the same.
     d. There is not enough information to determine the answer.

10. Which of the following is the R command to calculate the correlation coefficient r?
      a. correl
      b. cor
       c. slope
      d. lm

11. Which of the following is the R command to calculate the slope and y-intercept for a linear regression
      model?
      a. cor
      b. slope
       c. lm
      d. intercept

Review Questions

1. A correlation coefficient is calculated as  . Provide an interpretation for this correlation coefficient.

2. Explain what a residual is and how this relates to the best-fit regression model.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                              14 · Problems 445

3. Explain how to interpret the slope of the best-fit line.

4. Explain how to generate a prediction using a linear regression model.

5. Will the sign of the correlation coefficient always be the same as the sign of the slope of the best-fit linear
    regression model?

Problems

1. A Fortune 500 company is tracking revenues versus cash flow for recent years, and the data is shown in
    the table below. Consider cash flow to be the dependent variable. Create a scatter plot of the data set,
    comment on the correlation between these two variables, and comment on the correlation for this data
    (all dollar amounts are in thousands).

          Revenues ($000s) Cash Flow ($000s)

                       237  82

                       241  86

                       229  77

                       284  94

                       307  93

          Table 14.9

2. A Fortune 500 company is tracking revenues versus cash flow for recent years, and the data is shown in
    the table below. Consider cash flow to be the dependent variable. Calculate the correlation coefficient for
    this data (all dollar amounts are in thousands).

          Revenues ($000s) Cash Flow ($000s)

                       237  82

                       241  86

                       229  77

                       284  94

                       307  93

          Table 14.10

3. A chief financial officer calculates the correlation coefficient for bond prices versus interest rate as -0.71.
    The data set contained nine (x, y) data points. Determine if the correlation is significant or not significant
    at the 0.05 level of significance.

4. A Fortune 500 company is tracking revenues versus cash flow for recent years, and the data is shown in
    the table below. Consider cash flow to be the dependent variable. Determine the best-fit linear regression
    equation for this data set (all dollar amounts are in thousands).

          Revenues ($000s) Cash Flow ($000s)

                       237  82

                       241  86

          Table 14.11
446 14 · Problems

                                              229  77

                                              284  94

                                              307  93

                                 Table 14.11

5. A Fortune 500 company is tracking revenues versus cash flow for recent years, and the data is shown in
    the table below. Consider cash flow to be the dependent variable. Assume the correlation is significant.
    Predict the cash flow for company revenues of $250,000 (all dollar amounts are in thousands).

                                 Revenues ($000s) Cash Flow ($000s)

                                              237  82

                                              241  86

                                              229  77

                                              284  94

                                              307  93

                                 Table 14.12

6. A Fortune 500 company is tracking revenues versus cash flow for recent years, and the data is shown in
    the table below. Consider cash flow to be the dependent variable. Assume the correlation is significant.
    Predict the cash flow for company revenues of $750,000 (all dollar amounts are in thousands).

                                 Revenues ($000s) Cash Flow ($000s)

                                              237  82

                                              241  86

                                              229  77

                                              284  94

                                              307  93

                                 Table 14.13

7. A Fortune 500 company is tracking revenues versus cash flow for recent years, and the data is shown in
    the table below. Consider cash flow to be the dependent variable. Calculate the residual for the revenue
    value of $284,000 (all dollar amounts are in thousands):

                                 Revenues ($000s) Cash Flow ($000s)

                                              237  82

                                              241  86

                                              229  77

                                              284  94

                                              307  93

                                 Table 14.14

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         14 · Video Activity 447

     Video Activity

Simple Linear Regression
Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/linear_regression)
 1. Based on the scatter plot shown, will the correlation coefficient be a positive value or negative value?

     Would you estimate that the correlation is significant for the relationship between radio ads and revenue?
 2. For the linear regression model for ads versus revenue, the slope is shown as 78.075. How would this slope

     be interpreted (that is, provide a verbal description for the meaning of the slope of 78.075)?
How to Calculate Correlation for Stocks, Bonds, and Funds
Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/bonds_and_funds)
 3. Based on the presentation shown in the video, is the FTSE 100 index correlated with the value of sterling?

     Or are the two measures uncorrelated? What data leads to your conclusion?
 4. Based on the presentation in the video, is there a correlation between stock funds and bond funds? Why is

     this information important to an investor trying to design a portfolio?
448 14 · Video Activity
Access for free at openstax.org
15 · Why It Matters                                                                                                                       449

15
              How to Think about Investing

Figure 15.1 Investing can often provide great returns, but it can also be a risk. (credit: modification of work "E-ticker" by klip game/
Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

Chapter Outline

  15.1 Risk and Return to an Individual Asset
  15.2 Risk and Return to Multiple Assets
  15.3 The Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM)
  15.4 Applications in Performance Measurement
  15.5 Using Excel to Make Investment Decisions

      Why It Matters

Having finished her college degree and embarked on her career, Maria is now contemplating her financial
future. She is considering how she might invest some of her hard-earned money. As a short-term goal, she
wants to build an emergency fund so that she could cover her expenses for six months if she became ill or
injured and had to take time off of work. She would also like to save money for a down payment on a home
and to purchase new furniture. Although she is not yet 30 years old, Maria also knows that it is prudent to
begin saving for retirement.

What should she do with her savings? Maria has some friends who have told her how successful they have
been investing in stocks. Bart bragged about doubling his money in just over a year when he purchased
Facebook stock, and Tiffany quickly tripled her money when she purchased shares in Netflix. But Maria also
knows that her uncle lost a significant amount of money when his Boeing stock dropped from over $300 per
share to under $150 within a couple of months at the beginning of 2020. Just how risky would it be to invest in
stocks? What type of return might Maria expect? Are there strategies she could follow that would allow her to
avoid her uncle's fate?
450 15 · How to Think about Investing

      15.1 Risk and Return to an Individual Asset

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Compute the realized return from an individual investment.
         · Compute the average return and volatility of returns from historical data.
         · Describe firm-specific risk.

      Measuring Historical Returns

       Risk and return are often referred to as the two Rs of finance. Investors are interested in both risk and return
       because understanding one without the other is really meaningless. In terms of investment, the concept of
       return is fairly straightforward; return is the benefit, or profit, the investor expects from an expenditure. It is
       the reward for investing--the reason an investment is made in the first place. However, no investment is a
       sure thing. The return may not be what the investor was expecting. This uncertainty about what the return will
       be is referred to as risk.
       We begin by looking at how to measure both risk and return when considering an individual asset, such as one
       stock. If your grandparents bought 100 shares of Apple, Inc. stock for you when you were born, you are
       interested in knowing how well that investment has done. You may even want to compare how that
       investment has fared to how an investment in a different stock, perhaps Disney, would have done. You are
       interested in measuring the historical return.
       Individual Investment Realized Return
       The realized return of an investment is the total return that occurs over a particular time period. Suppose that
       you purchased a share of Target (TGT) at the beginning of January 2020 for $128.74. At the end of the year, you
       sold the stock for $176.53, which was $47.79 more than you paid for it. This increase in value is known as a
       capital gain. As the owner of the stock, you also received $2.68 in dividends during 2020. The total dollar return
       from your investment is calculated as

       It is common to express investment returns in percentage terms rather than dollar terms. This allows you to
       answer the question "How much do I receive for each dollar invested?" so that you can compare investments
       of different sizes. The total percent return from your investment is

       The dividend yield is calculated by dividing the dividends you received by the initial stock price. This
       calculation says that for each dollar invested in TGT in 2020, you received $0.0208 in dividends. The capital
       gain yield is the change in the stock price divided by the initial stock price. This calculation says that for each
       dollar invested in TGT in 2020, you received $0.3712 in capital gains. Your total percent return of 39.20% means
       that you made $0.392 for every dollar invested when your gains from both dividends and stock price
       appreciation are totaled together.

       THINK IT THROUGH

       Calculating Return

         You purchased 10 shares of 3M (MMM) stock in January 2020 for $175 per share, received dividends of $5.91

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  15.1 · Risk and Return to an Individual Asset 451

per share, and sold the stock at the end of the year for $169.72 per share. Calculate your total dollar return,
your dividend yield, your capital gain yield, and your total percent yield.

Solution:

Because you purchased 10 shares, you received                                     in dividend income. You spent
                                      to purchase the stock, and you sold it for                                       Your total

dollar return is

Your dividend yield is              , or 3.38%, and your capital gain yield is
                        or 3.02%. Your total percent return is

Notice that you sold MMM for a price lower than what you paid for it at the beginning of the year. Your
capital gain is negative, or what is often referred to as a capital loss. Although the price fell, you still had a
positive total dollar return because of the dividend income.

Of course, investors seldom purchase a stock and then sell it exactly one year later. Assume that you
purchased shares of Facebook (FB) on June 1, 2020, for $228.50 per share and sold the shares three months
later for $261.90. You received no dividends. In this case, your holding period percentage return is calculated
as

This 14.62% is your return for a three-month holding period. To compare them to other investment
opportunities, you need to express returns on a per-year, or annualized, basis. The holding period returned is
converted to an effective annual rate (EAR) using the formula

where m is the number of holding periods in a year.
There are four three-month periods in a year. So, the EAR for this investment is

What happens if you own a stock for more than one year? Your holding period return would have occurred
over a period longer than a year, but the process to calculate the EAR is the same. Suppose you purchased
shares of FB in May 2015, when it was selling for $79.30 per share. You held the stock until May 2020, when you

sold it for $224.59. Your holding period percentage return would be                        . You more

than tripled your money, but it took you five years to do so. Your EAR, which will be smaller than this five-year
holding period return rate, is calculated as

Average Annual Returns

Suppose that you purchased shares of Delta Airlines (DAL) at the beginning of 2011 for $11.19 and held the

stock for 10 years before selling it for $40.21. You made                         on your investment over

a 10-year period. This is a 259.34% holding period return. The EAR for this investment is
452 15 · How to Think about Investing

       To calculate the EAR using the above formula, the holding period return must first be calculated. The holding
       period return represents the percentage return earned over the entire time the investment is held. Then the
       holding period return is converted to an annual percentage rate using the formula.

       You can also use the basic time value of money formula to calculate the EAR on an investment. In time value of
       money language, the initial price paid for the investment, $11.19, is the present value. The price the stock is
       sold for, $40.21, is the future value. It takes 10 years for the $11.19 to grow to $40.21. Using the time value of
       money will result in a calculation of

The EAR formula and the time value of money both result in a 13.65% annual return. Mathematically, the two
formulas are the same; one is simply an algebraic rearrangement of the other.

If you earned 13.65% each year, compounded for 10 years, you would have converted your $11.19 per share
investment to $40.21 per share. Of course, DAL stock did not increase by exactly 13.65% each year. The returns
for DAL for each year are shown in Table 15.1. Some years, the return was much higher than 13.65%. In 2013,
the return was almost 133%! Other years, the return was much lower than 13.65%; in fact, in the return was
negative in four of the years.

                                 Year Return Value of Investment ($)

                                               Initial investment of 11.19

                                 2011 -0.3579        7.19

                                 2012 0.4672         10.54

                                 2013 1.3261         24.52

                                 2014 0.8053         44.27

                                 2015 0.0405         46.06

                                 2016 -0.0135        45.44

                                 2017 0.1623         52.81

                                 2018 -0.0866        48.24

                                 2019 0.2038         58.07

                                 2020 -0.3077        40.20

                                 Table 15.1 Yearly Returns for DAL, 2011-2020:
                                 Value of Initial Investment at Each Year End

Although an investment in DAL of $11.19 at the beginning of 2011 grew to $40.20 by the end of 2020, this

growth was not consistent each year. The amount that the stock was worth at the end of each year is also

shown in Table 15.1. During 2011, the return for DAL was -35.79%, resulting in the value of the investment

falling to                                  . The following year, 2012, the return for DAL was 46.72%.

Therefore, the value of the investment was                                      at the end of 2012. This

process continues each year that the stock is held.

The compounded annual return derived from the EAR and time value of money formulas is also known as a
geometric average return. A geometric average return is calculated using the formula

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       15.1 · Risk and Return to an Individual Asset 453

where RN is the return for each year in the time period for which the average is calculated.

The calculation of the geometric average return for DAL is shown in the right column of Table 15.2. (The slight
difference in the geometric average return of 13.64% from the 13.65% derived from the EAR and time value of
money calculations is due to rounding errors.)

                             Year     Return 1 + Return

                             2011     -0.3579 0.6421

                             2012     0.4672 1.4672

                             2013     1.3261 2.3261

                             2014     0.8053 1.8053

                             2015     0.0405 1.0405

                             2016     -0.0135 0.9865

                             2017     0.1623 1.1623

                             2018     -0.0866 0.9134

                             2019     0.2038 1.2038

                             2020     -0.3077 0.6923

      Arithmetic Avg 0.2240 3.5928 Product of (1 + Return)

                             Std Dev  0.5190 1.1364 Product raised to 1/N

                                      0.1364 Geometric Average

      Table 15.2 Yearly Returns for DAL, 2011-2020, with Calculation of the
      Arithmetic Mean, Standard Deviation, and Geometric Mean

Looking at Table 15.2, you will notice that the geometric average return differs from the mean return. Adding
each of the annual returns and dividing the sum by 10 results in a 22.4% average annual return. This 22.4% is
called the arithmetic average return.

The geometric average return will be smaller than the arithmetic average return (unless the returns for all

years are identical). This is due to the basic arithmetic of compounding. Think of a very simple example in

which you invest $100 for two years. If you have a positive return of 50% the first year and a negative 50%

return the second year, you will have an arithmetic average return of        , but you will have a

geometric average return of                                            . With a 50% positive return the

first year, you ended the year with $150. The second year, you lost 50% of that balance and were left with only

$75.

Another important fact when studying average returns is that the order in which you earn the returns is not

important. Consider what would have occurred if the returns in the two years were reversed, so that you faced

a loss of 50% in the first year of your investment and a gain of 50% in the second year of your investment. With

a -50% return in the first year, you would have ended that year with only $50. Then, if that $50 earned a

positive 50% return the second year, you would have a $75 balance at the end of the two-year period. A

negative return of 50% followed by a positive return of 50% still results in an arithmetic average return of 0%

and a geometric average return of                                      .
454 15 · How to Think about Investing

THINK IT THROUGH

Calculating Arithmetic and Geometric Average Return

The annual returns for CVS Health Corp. (CVS) for the 10-year period of 2011-2020 are shown in Table 15.3.

                                                                  Year Returns
                                                                  2011 18.94%
                                                                  2012 20.28%
                                                                  2013 50.38%
                                                                  2014 37.12%
                                                                  2015 2.90%
                                                                  2016 -17.83%
                                                                  2017 -5.75%
                                                                  2018 -7.04%
                                                                  2019 17.26%
                                                                  2020 -5.14%

                                                                               Table 15.3 CVS
                                                                               Annual Returns,
                                                                               2011-2020
                                                                               (source: Yahoo!
                                                                               Finance)

What was the arithmetic average return during the decade? What was the geometric average return during
the decade?

Solution:

See Table 15.4 for the arithmetic mean and geometric mean calculations.

                                       Arithmetic Average Calculation Geometric Average Calculation

           Year                        Return  1 + Return
           2011
           2012                                0.1894 1.1894
           2013
           2014                                0.2028 1.2028
           2015
           2016                                0.5038 1.5038
           2017
           2018                                0.3712 1.3712
           2019
           2020                                0.0290 1.0290

                                               -0.1783 0.8217

                                               -0.0575 0.9425

                                               -0.0704 0.9296

                                               0.1726 1.1726

                                               -0.0514 0.9486

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      15.1 · Risk and Return to an Individual Asset 455

                    Arithmetic Average Calculation    Geometric Average Calculation

Sum of Returns                                1.1112  2.4309 Product of (1 + Return)

Sum Divided by 10                             0.1111  1.0929 Raise Product to 1/10

Arithmetic Average                            11.11%  0.0929  Subtract 1

                                                      9.29% Geometric Average

Table 15.4 Yearly Returns for CVS, 2011-2020

The arithmetic average return for CVS was 11.11%, and the geometric average return was 9.29%.

Both the arithmetic average return and the geometric average return are "correct" calculations. They simply
answer different questions. The geometric average tells you what you actually earned per year on average,
compounded annually. It is useful for calculating how much a particular investment grows over a period of
time. The arithmetic average tells you what you earned in a typical year. When we are looking at the historical
description of the distribution of returns and want to predict what to expect in a particular year, the arithmetic
average is the relevant calculation.

Measuring Risk

Although the arithmetic average return for Delta Airlines (DAL) for 2011-2020 was 22.4%, there is not a year in
which the return was exactly 22.4%. In fact, in some years, the return was much higher than the average, such
as in 2013, when it was 132.61%. In other years, the return was negative, such as 2011, when it was -35.79%.
Looking at the yearly returns in Table 15.2, the return for DAL varies widely from year to year. In finance, this
volatility of returns is considered risk.

Volatility of Returns

The most commonly used measure of volatility of returns in finance is the standard deviation of the returns.
The standard deviation of returns for DAL for the sample period 2011-2020 is 51.9%. Remember that if the
normal distribution (a bell-shaped curve) describes returns, then 68% (or about two-thirds) of the time, the
return in a particular year will be within one standard deviation above and one standard deviation below the
arithmetic average return. Given DAL's average return of 22.4%, the actual yearly return will be somewhere
between -29.5% and 74.29% in two out of three years. A very high return of greater than 74.29% would occur
16% of the time; a very large loss of more than 29.5% would also occur 16% of the time.

As you can see, there is a wide range of what can be considered a "typical" year for DAL. Although we can
calculate an average return, the return in any particular year is likely to vary from that average. The larger the
standard deviation, the greater this range of returns is. Thus, a larger standard deviation indicates a greater
volatility of returns and, hence, more risk.

 THINK IT THROUGH

 Calculating the Standard Deviation of Returns

  You calculated the arithmetic average return for CVS to be 11.11% for the 10-year period of 2011-2020.
  Calculate the standard deviation of returns for CVS for the same period (see Table 15.5). What does this tell
  you about what an investor in CVS experienced in a typical year during that decade?

  Solution:
456 15 · How to Think about Investing

Year Return Return - Mean Squared Difference

2011 0.1894                            0.0783   0.0061

2012 0.2028                            0.0917   0.0084

2013 0.5038                            0.3927   0.1542

2014 0.3712                            0.2601   0.0676

2015 0.0290                            -0.0821  0.0067

2016 -0.1783                           -0.2894  0.0838

2017 -0.0575                           -0.1686  0.0284

2018 -0.0704                           -0.1815  0.0329

2019 0.1726                            0.0615   0.0038

2020 -0.0514                           -0.1625  0.0264

Mean 0.1111                                     0.4185  Sum of Squared Differences

                                                0.0465  Sum Divided by N - 1

                                                0.2156  Square Root

Table 15.5 Standard Deviation of CVS Returns

The standard deviation of returns for CVS during the sample period of 2011-2020 was 21.56%. With an
arithmetic average return of 11.11%, the return would lie between -10.45% and 32.67% in about two out of
three years. Even though the average return is 11.11%, a return in a particular year might be much higher
or much lower than that average. In fact, a loss of more than 10.45% would be expected about once every
six years. Also, about once every six years, a return greater than 32.67% would be expected.

Firm-Specific Risk

Investors purchase a share of stock hoping that the stock will increase in value and they will receive a positive
return. You can see, however, that even with well-established companies such as ExxonMobil and CVS, returns
are highly volatile. Investors can never perfectly predict what the return on a stock will be, or even if it will be
positive.

The yearly returns for four companies--Delta Airlines (DAL), Southwest Airlines (LUV), ExxonMobil (XOM), and
CVS Health Corp. (CVS)--are shown in Table 15.6. Each of these stocks had years in which the performance was
much better or much worse than the arithmetic average. In fact, none of the stocks appear to have a typical
return that occurs year after year.

                                       Year                  Two-Stock Portfolio
                                       2011    DAL LUV XOM CVS
                                       2012  -35.79% -33.93% 18.67% 18.94%
                                       2013   46.72% 20.03% 4.70% 20.28%
                                       2014  132.61% 85.38% 20.12% 50.38%
                                       2015   80.53% 126.47% -6.06% 37.12%
                                                4.05% 2.43% -12.79% 2.90%

                                       Table 15.6 Yearly Returns for DAL, LUV, XOM, and
                                       CVS (source: Yahoo! Finance)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                          15.1 · Risk and Return to an Individual Asset 457

                                                                            Two-Stock Portfolio
                                                 Year DAL LUV XOM CVS
                                                 2016 -1.35% 16.72% 19.88% -17.83%
                                                 2017 16.23% 32.41% -3.81% -5.75%
                                                 2018 -8.66% -28.28% -15.09% -7.04%
                                                 2019 20.38% 17.69% 7.23% 17.26%
                                                 2020 -30.77% -13.04% -36.21% -5.14%
                                               Average 22.40% 22.59% -0.34% 11.11%
                                               Std Dev 51.90% 49.84% 18.18% 21.56%

                                                        Table 15.6 Yearly Returns for DAL, LUV, XOM, and
                                                        CVS (source: Yahoo! Finance)

Figure 15.2 contains a graph of the returns for each of these four stocks by year. In this graph, it is easy to see
that DAL and LUV both have more volatility, or returns that vary more from year to year, than do XOM or CVS.
This higher volatility leads to DAL and LUV having higher standard deviations of returns than XOM or CVS.

                                Figure 15.2 Yearly Returns for DAL, LUV, XOM, and CVS (data source: Yahoo! Finance)

Standard deviation is considered a measure of the risk of owning a stock. The larger the standard deviation of
a stock's annual returns, the further from the average that stock's return is likely to be in any given year. In
other words, the return for the stock is highly unpredictable. Although the return for CVS varies from year to
year, it is not subject to the wide swings of the returns for DAL or LUV.
Why are stock returns so volatile? The value of the stock of a company changes as the expectations of the
future revenues and expenses of the company change. These expectations may change due to a number of
events and new information. Good news about a company will tend to result in an increase in the stock price.
For example, DAL announcing that it will be opening new routes and flying to cities it has not previously
serviced suggests that DAL will have more customers and more revenue in future years. Or if CVS announces
that it has negotiated lower rent for many of its locations, investors will expect the expenses of the company to
fall, leading to more profits. Those types of announcements will often be associated with a higher stock price.
Conversely, if the pilots and flight attendants for DAL negotiate higher salaries, the expenses for DAL will
increase, putting downward pressure on profits and the stock price.
458 15 · How to Think about Investing

       LINK TO LEARNING

       Peloton and Risk

         An example of how news can impact the price of a stock occurred on May 5, 2021, when Peloton recalled all
         of its Tread+ and Tread products after the tragic death of a child and 70 injuries associated with use of its
         products.1 The previous day, Peloton stock traded for $96.70 per share. The stock price dropped
         approximately 15% when the recall was announced. The closing price for a share of Peloton on May 5 was
         $82.62.2 You can read the company's statement about this recall (https://openstax.org/r/
         the_companys_recall) online.

      15.2 Risk and Return to Multiple Assets

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Explain the benefits of diversification.
         · Describe the relationship between risk and return for large portfolios.
         · Compare firm-specific and systematic risk.
         · Discuss how portfolio size impacts risk.

      Diversification

       So far, we have looked at the return and the volatility of an individual stock. Most investors, however, own
       shares of stock in multiple companies. This collection of stocks is known as a portfolio. Let's explore why it is
       wise for investors to hold a portfolio of stocks rather than to pick just one favorite stock to own.

       We saw that investors who owned DAL experienced an average annual return of 20.87% but also a large
       standard deviation of 51.16%. Investors who used all their funds to purchase DAL stock did exceptionally well
       during 2012-2014. But in 2020, those investors lost almost one-third of their money as COVID-19 caused a
       sharp reduction in air travel worldwide. To protect against these extreme outcomes, investors practice what is
       called diversification, or owning a variety of stocks in their portfolios.

       Suppose, for example, you have saved $50,000 that you want to invest. If you purchased $50,000 of DAL stock,
       you would not be diversified. Your return would depend solely on the return on DAL stock. If, instead, you used
       $5,000 to purchase DAL stock and used the remaining $45,000 to purchase nine other stocks, you would be
       diversifying. Your return would depend not only on DAL's return but also on the returns of the other nine
       stocks in your portfolio. Investors practice diversification to manage risk.

       It is akin to the saying "Don't put all of your eggs in one basket." If you place all of your eggs in one basket
       and that basket breaks, all of your eggs will fall and crack. If you spread your eggs out across a number of
       baskets, it is unlikely that all of the baskets will break and all of your eggs will crack. One basket may break,
       and you will lose the eggs in that basket, but you will still have your other eggs. The same idea holds true for
       investing. If you own stock in a company that does poorly, perhaps even goes out of business, you will lose the
       money you placed in that particular investment. However, with a diversified portfolio, you do not lose all your
       money because your money is spread out across a number of different companies.

        1 Trefis Team and Great Speculations. "Is Peloton's Tread+ Recall an Opportunity to Buy the Stock?" Forbes, May 7, 2021.
        https://www.forbes.com/sites/greatspeculations/2021/05/07/is-pelotons-tread-recall-an-opportunity-to-buy-the-stock/
        2 Tomi Kilgore. "Peloton Stock Sinks to 8-Month Low after 125,000 Treadmills Recalled for `Risk of Injury or Death.'" MarketWatch.
        May 6, 2021. https://www.marketwatch.com/story/peloton-stock-sinks-toward-9-month-low-after-125-000-treadmills-recalled-for-
        risk-of-injury-or-death-11620233715

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                     15.2 · Risk and Return to Multiple Assets 459

LINK TO LEARNING

Diversification

Fidelity Investments Inc. is a multinational financial services firm and one of the largest asset managers in
the world. In this educational video for investors (https://openstax.org/r/educational_investors), Fidelity
provides an explanation of what diversification is and how it impacts an investor's portfolio.

Table 15.7 shows the returns of investors who placed 50% of their money in DAL and the remaining 50% in
LUV, XOM, or CVS. Notice that the standard deviation of returns is lower for the two-stock portfolios than for
DAL as an individual investment.

                Two-Stock Portfolio

Year DAL DAL and LUV DAL and XOM DAL and CVS

2011 -35.79%    -34.86%  -8.56%      -8.43%

2012 46.72%     33.38%   25.71%      33.50%

2013 132.61%    109.00%  76.36%      91.50%

2014 80.53%     103.50%  37.24%      58.83%

2015 4.05%      3.24%    -4.37%      3.47%

2016 -1.35%     7.69%    9.27%       -9.59%

2017 16.23%     24.32%   6.21%       5.24%

2018 -8.66%     -18.47%  -11.88%     -7.85%

2019 20.38%     19.03%   13.81%      18.82%

2020 -30.77%    -21.90%  -33.49%     -17.95%

Average 22.40%  22.49%   11.03%      16.75%

Std Dev 51.90%  49.11%   30.43%      35.10%

Table 15.7 Yearly Returns for DAL Versus a Two-Stock Portfolio
Containing DAL and LUV, XOM, or CVS (data source: Yahoo! Finance)

As investors diversify their portfolios, the volatility of one particular stock becomes less important. XOM has
good years with above-average returns and bad years with below-average (and even negative) returns, just
like DAL. But the years in which those above-average and below-average returns occur are not always the
same for the two companies. In 2014, for example, the return for DAL was greater than 80%, while the return
for XOM was negative. On the other hand, in 2011, when DAL had a return of -35.15%, XOM had a positive
return. When more than one stock is held, the gains in one stock can offset the losses in another stock,
washing away some of the volatility.

When an investor holds only one stock, that one stock's volatility contributes 100% to the portfolio's volatility.
When two stocks are held, the volatility of each stock contributes to the volatility of the portfolio. However, the
volatility of the portfolio is not simply the average of the volatility of each stock held independently. How
correlated the two stocks are, or how much they move together, will impact the volatility of the portfolio.

You will recall from our study of correlation in Regression Analysis in Finance that a correlation coefficient
describes how two variables move relative to each other. A correlation coefficient of 1 means that there is a
perfect, positive correlation between the two variables, while a correlation coefficient of -1 means that the two
variables move exactly opposite of each other. Stocks that are in the same industry will tend to be more
460 15 · How to Think about Investing

       strongly correlated than stocks that are in much different industries. During the 2011-2020 time period, the
       correlation coefficient for DAL and LUV was 0.87, the correlation coefficient for DAL and XOM was 0.35, and the
       correlation coefficient for DAL and CVS was 0.79. Combining stocks that are not perfectly positively correlated
       in a portfolio decreases risk.

       Notice that investors who owned DAL and LUV from 2011 to 2020 would have had a lower portfolio standard
       deviation, but not much lower, than investors who just owned DAL. Because the correlation coefficient is less
       than one, the standard deviation fell. However, because the two stocks are in the same industry and exposed
       to many of the same economic issues, the correlation coefficient is relatively high, and combining those two
       stocks provides only a small decrease in risk.

       This is because, as airlines, DAL and LUV face many of the same market conditions. In years when the economy
       is strong, the weather is good, fuel prices are low, and people are traveling a lot, both companies will do well.
       When something such as bad weather conditions reduces the amount of air travel for several weeks, both
       companies are harmed. By holding LUV in addition to DAL, investors can reduce exposure to risk that is
       specific to DAL (perhaps a problem that DAL has with its reservation system), but they do not reduce exposure
       to the risk associated with the airline industry (perhaps rising jet fuel prices). DAL and LUV tend to experience
       positive returns in the same years and negative returns in the same years.

       On the other hand, investors who added XOM to their portfolio saw a significantly lower standard deviation
       than those who held just DAL. In years when jet fuel prices rise, harming the profits of both DAL and LUV, XOM
       is likely to see high profits. Diversifying a portfolio across firms that are less correlated will reduce the
       standard deviation of the portfolio more.

       LINK TO LEARNING

       How to Build a Diversified Portfolio

         TV personality, former hedge fund manager, and author Jim Cramer encourages investors to build a
         diversified portfolio, having no more than 20% of a portfolio in one sector.3 Watch this CNBC video
         (https://openstax.org/r/CNBC_video) to learn more about how he suggests investors can build a diversified
         portfolio by purchasing five to 10 stocks.

      Portfolio Size and Risk

       As you add more stocks to a portfolio, the volatility, or standard deviation, of the portfolio decreases. The
       volatility of individual assets becomes less and less important. As we discussed earlier, the risk that is
       associated with events related to a particular company is called firm-specific risk, or unsystematic, risk.
       Examples of unsystematic risk would include a company facing a product liability lawsuit, a company inventing
       a new product, or accounting irregularities being detected. Holding a portfolio of stocks means that if one
       company you have invested in goes out of business because of poor management, you do not lose all your
       savings because some of your money is invested in other companies. Portfolio diversification protects you
       from being significantly impacted by unsystematic risk.

       However, there is a level below which the portfolio risk does not drop, no matter how diversified the portfolio
       becomes. The risk that never goes away is known as systematic risk. Systematic risk is the risk of holding the
       market portfolio.

       We have talked about reasons why a firm's returns might be volatile; for example, the firm discovering a new
       technology or having a product liability lawsuit brought against it will impact that firm specifically. There are
       also events that broadly impact the stock market. Changes in the Federal Reserve Bank's monetary policy and

        3 Abigail Stevenson. "Jim Cramer Shares His #1 Rule for Investing." Make It. CNBC, March 15, 2016. https://www.cnbc.com/2016/03/
        03/cramer-forget-sectors-a-better-way-to-diversify.html

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                         15.3 · The Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) 461

interest rates impact all companies. Geopolitical events, major storms, and pandemics can also impact the
entire market. Investors in stocks cannot avoid this type of risk. This unavoidable risk is the systematic risk that
investors in stocks have. This systematic risk cannot be eliminated through diversification.
In addition, as per research conducted by Meir Statman,4 the standard deviation of a portfolio drops quickly as
the number of stocks in the portfolio increases from one to two or three (see Figure 2 illustration in this
subsequent article by Statman (https://openstax.org/r/subsequent_Statman) for context). Increasing the size
of the portfolio decreases the standard deviation, and thus the risk, of the portfolio. However, as the portfolio
increases in size, the amount of risk reduced by adding one more stock to the portfolio will decrease. How
many stocks does an investor need for a portfolio to be well-diversified? There is not an exact number that all
financial managers agree on. A portfolio of 15 highly correlated stocks will offer less benefits of diversification
than a portfolio of 10 stocks with lower correlation coefficients. A portfolio that consists of American Airlines,
Spirit Airlines, United Airlines, Southwest Airlines, Delta Airlines, and Jet Blue, along with a few other stocks, is
not very diversified because of the heavy concentration in the airline industry. The term diversified portfolio is
a relative concept, but the average investor can create a reasonably diversified portfolio with approximately a
dozen stocks.

 15.3 The Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM)

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Define risk premium.
  · Explain the concept of beta.
  · Compute the required return of a security using the CAPM.

Risk-Free Rate

The capital asset pricing model (CAPM) is a financial theory based on the idea that investors who are willing
to hold stocks that have higher systematic risk should be rewarded more for taking on this market risk. The
CAPM focuses on systematic risk, rather than a stock's individual risk, because firm-specific risk can be
eliminated through diversification.
Suppose that your grandparents have given you a gift of $20,000. After you graduate from college, you plan to
work for a few years and then apply to law school. You want to use the $20,000 your grandparents gave you to
pay for part of your law school tuition. It will be several years before you are ready to spend the money, and
you want to keep the money safe. At the same time, you would like to invest the money and have it grow until
you are ready to start law school.
Although you would like to earn a return on the money so that you have more than $20,000 by the time you
start law school, your primary objective is to keep the money safe. You are looking for a risk-free investment.
Lending money to the US government is considered the lowest-risk investment that you can make. You can
purchase a US Treasury security. The chances of the US government not paying its debts is close to zero.
Although, in theory, no investment is 100% risk-free, investing in US government securities is generally
considered a risk-free investment because the risk is so miniscule.

4 Meir Statman. "How Many Stocks Make a Diversified Portfolio?" Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 22, no. 3
(September 1987): 353-363. https://doi.org/10.2307/2330969
462 15 · How to Think about Investing

       The rate that you can earn by purchasing US Treasury securities is a proxy for the risk-free rate. It is used as
       an investing benchmark. The average rate of return for the three-month US Treasury security from 1928 to
       2020 is 3.36%.5 You can see that you will not become immensely wealthy by investing in US Treasury bills.
       Another characteristic of US Treasury securities, however, is that their volatility tends to be much lower than
       that of stocks. In fact, the standard deviation of returns for the US Treasury bills is 3.0%. Unlike the returns for
       stocks, the return on US Treasury bills has never been negative. The lowest annual return was 0.03%, which
       occurred in 2014.6

       LINK TO LEARNING

       US Treasury Securities

         Visit the website of the US Department of the Treasury (https://openstax.org/r/home.treasury) to learn
         more about US Treasury securities. You will find current interest rates for both short-term securities (US
         Treasury bills) and long-term securities (US Treasury bonds).

      Risk Premium

       You know that if you use your $20,000 to invest in stock rather than in US Treasury bills, the outcome of the
       investment will be uncertain. Your investments may do well, but there is also a risk of losing money. You will
       only be willing to take on this risk if you are rewarded for doing so. In other words, you will only be willing to
       take the risk of investing in stocks if you think that doing so will make you more than you would make
       investing in US Treasury securities.

       From 1928 to 2020, the average return for the S&P 500 stock index has been 11.64%, which is much higher
       than the 3.36% average return for US Treasury bills.7 Stock returns, with a standard deviation of 19.49%,
       however, have also been much more volatile. In fact, there were 25 years in which the return for the S&P 500
       index was negative.

       You may not be willing to take the risk of losing some of the money your grandparents gave you because you
       have been setting it aside for law school. If that's the case, you will want to invest in US Treasury securities.
       You may have money that you are saving for other long-term goals, such as retirement, with which you are
       willing to take some risk. The extra return that you will earn for taking on risk is known as the risk premium.
       The risk premium can be thought of as your reward for being willing to bear risk.

       The risk premium is calculated as the difference between the return you receive for taking on risk and what
       you would have returned if you did not take on risk. Using the average return of the S&P 500 (to measure what
       investors who bear the risk earn) and the US Treasury bill rate (to measure what investors who do not bear
       risk earn), the risk premium is calculated as

      Beta

       The risk premium represents how much an investor who takes on the market portfolio is rewarded for risk.
       Investors who purchase one stock--DAL, for example--experience volatility, which is measured by the
       standard deviation of that stock's returns. Remember that some of that volatility, the volatility caused by firm-
       specific risk, can be diversified away. Because investors can eliminate firm-specific risk through diversification,
       they will not be rewarded for that risk. Investors are rewarded for the amount of systematic risk they incur.

        5 "Historical Return on Stocks, Bonds and Bills: 1928-2020." Damodaran Online. Stern School of Business, New York University,
        January 2021. http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~adamodar/New_Home_Page/datafile/histretSP.html
        6 Ibid.
        7 Ibid.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                         15.3 · The Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) 463

Interpreting Beta
The relevant risk for investors is the systematic risk they incur. The systematic risk of a particular stock is
measured by how much the stock moves with the market. The measure of how much a stock moves with the
market is known as its beta. A stock that tends to move in sync with the market will have a beta of 1. For these
stocks, if the market goes up 10%, the stock generally also goes up 10%; if the market goes down 5%, stocks
with a beta of 1 also tend to go down 5%.
If a company has a beta greater than 1, then the stock tends to have a more pronounced move in the same
direction as a market move. For example, if a stock has a beta of 2, the stock will tend to increase by 20% when
the market goes up by 10%. If the market falls by 5%, that same stock will tend to fall by twice as much, or 10%.
Thus, stocks with a beta greater than 1 experience greater swings than the overall market and are considered
to be riskier than the average stock.
On the other hand, stocks with a beta less than 1 experience smaller swings than the overall market. A beta of
0.5, for example, means that a stock tends to experience moves that are only 50% of overall market moves. So,
if the market increases by 10%, a stock with a beta of 0.5 would tend to rise by only 5%. A market decline of 5%
would tend to be associated with a 2.5% decrease in the stock.
Calculating Betas
The calculation of beta for DAL is demonstrated in Figure 15.3. Monthly returns for DAL and for the S&P 500
are plotted in the diagram. Each dot in the scatter plot corresponds to a month from 2018 to 2020; for
example, the dot that lies furthest in the upper right-hand corner represents November 2020. The return for
the S&P 500 was 10.88% that month; this return is plotted along the horizontal axis. The return for DAL during
November 2020 was 31.36%; this return is plotted along the vertical axis.
You can see that generally, when the overall stock market as measured by the S&P 500 is positive, the return
for DAL is also positive. Likewise, in months in which the return for the S&P 500 is negative, the return for DAL
is also usually negative. Drawing a line that best fits the data, also known as a regression line, summarizes the
relationship between the returns for DAL and the S&P 500. The slope of this line, 1.39, is DAL's beta. Beta
measures the amount of systematic risk that DAL has.

                                           Figure 15.3 Calculation of Beta for DAL (data source: Yahoo! Finance)
464 15 · How to Think about Investing

      CAPM Equation

       Because DAL's beta of 1.39 is greater than 1, DAL is riskier than the average stock in the market. Finance
       theory suggests that investors who purchase DAL will expect a higher rate of return to compensate them for
       this risk. DAL has 139% of the average stock's systematic risk; therefore, investors in the stock should receive
       139% of the market risk premium.
       The capital asset pricing model (CAPM) equation is

       where Re is the expected return of the asset, Rf is the risk-free rate of return, and Rm is the expected return of
       the market. Given the average S&P 500 return of 11.64% and the average US Treasury bill return of 3.36%, the
       expected return of DAL would be calculated as

       LINK TO LEARNING
       Calculating Beta

         Many providers of stock data and investment information will list a company's beta. Two internet sources
         that can be used to find a company's beta are Yahoo! Finance (https://openstax.org/r/finance.yahoo) and
         MarketWatch (https://openstax.org/r/marketwatch_search). Various sources may not provide the exact
         same value for beta for a company. For example, in early February 2021, Yahoo! Finance reported that the
         beta for DAL was 1.46,8 while MarketWatch reported it as 1.29.9 Both of these numbers are slightly
         different from the 1.39 calculated in the graph above.
         There are several reasons why beta may vary slightly from source to source. One is the time frame used in
         the beta calculation. Data from three years were used to calculate the beta in Figure 15.3. Time frames
         ranging from three to five years are commonly used when calculating beta. Another reason different
         sources might report different betas is the frequency with which the data is collected. Monthly returns are
         used in Figure 15.3; some analysts will use weekly data. Finally, the S&P 500 is used to measure the market
         return in Figure 15.3; the S&P 500 is one of the most common measures of overall market returns, but
         alternatives exist and are used by some analysts

       LINK TO LEARNING
       CAPM

         Watch this video (https://openstax.org/r/pricing-model-capm) for further information about the CAPM.

        8 "Delta Air Lines, Inc. (DAL)." Yahoo! Finance. Verizon Media, accessed February 2021. https://finance.yahoo.com/quote/DAL/
        9 "Delta Air Lines Inc." MarketWatch. Accessed February 2021. https://www.marketwatch.com/investing/stock/dal

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                   15.4 · Applications in Performance Measurement 465

 15.4 Applications in Performance Measurement

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Interpret a Sharpe ratio.
  · Interpret a Treynor measurement.
  · Interpret Jensen's alpha.

Sharpe Ratio

Investors want a measure of how good a professional money manager is before they entrust their hard-
earned funds to that professional for investing. Suppose that you see an advertisement in which McKinley
Investment Management claims that the portfolios of its clients have an average return of 20% per year. You
know that this average annual return is meaningless without also knowing something about the riskiness of
the firm's strategy. In this section, we consider some ways to evaluate the riskiness of an investment strategy.
A basic measure of investment performance that includes an adjustment for risk is the Sharpe ratio. The
Sharpe ratio is computed as a portfolio's risk premium divided by the standard deviation of the portfolio's
return, using the formula

The portfolio risk premium is the portfolio return RP minus the risk-free return Rf; this is the basic reward for
bearing risk. If the risk-free return is 3%, McKinley Investment Management's clients who are earning 20% on
their portfolios have an excess return of 17%.
The standard deviation of the portfolio's return, , is a measure of risk. Although you see that McKinley's
clients earn a nice 20% return on average, you find that the returns are highly volatile. In some years, the
clients earn much more than 20%, and in other years, the return is much lower, even negative. That volatility
leads to a standard deviation of returns of 26%. The Sharpe ratio would be , or 0.65.

Thus, the Sharpe ratio can be thought of as a reward-to-risk ratio. The standard deviation in the denominator
can be thought of as the units of risk the investor has. The numerator is the reward the investor is receiving for
taking on that risk.

 LINK TO LEARNING

 Sharpe Ratio

  The Sharpe ratio was developed by Nobel laureate William F. Sharpe. You can visit Sharpe's Stanford
  University website (https://openstax.org/r/stanford_wfsharpe) to find videos in which he discusses financial
  topics and links to his research as well as his advice on how to invest.

Treynor Measurement of Performance

Another reward-to-risk ratio measurement of investment performance is the Treynor ratio. The Treynor ratio
is calculated as

Just as with the Sharpe ratio, the numerator of the Treynor ratio is a portfolio's risk premium; the difference is
that the Treynor ratio focus focuses on systematic risk, using the beta of the portfolio in the denominator,
while the Shape ratio focuses on total risk, using the standard deviation of the portfolio's returns in the
466 15 · How to Think about Investing

       denominator.
       If McKinley Investment Management has a portfolio with a 20% return over the past five years, with a beta of
       1.2 and a risk-free rate of 3%, the Treynor ratio would be

       Both the Sharpe and Treynor ratios are relative measures of investment performance, meaning that there is
       not an absolute number that indicates whether an investment performance is good or bad. An investment
       manager's performance must be considered in relation to that of other managers or to a benchmark index.

      Jensen's Alpha

       Jensen's alpha is another common measure of investment performance. It is computed as the raw portfolio
       return minus the expected portfolio return predicted by the CAPM:

Suppose that the average market return has been 12%. What would Jensen's alpha be for McKinley Investment
Management's portfolio with a 20% average return and a beta of 1.2?

Unlike the Sharpe and Treynor ratios, which are meaningful in a relative sense, Jensen's alpha is meaningful in
an absolute sense. An alpha of 0.062 indicates that the McKinley Investment Management portfolio provided a
return that was 6.2% higher than would be expected given the riskiness of the portfolio. A positive alpha
indicates that the portfolio had an abnormal return. If Jensen's alpha equals zero, the portfolio return was
exactly what was expected given the riskiness of the portfolio as measured by beta.

THINK IT THROUGH

Comparing the Returns and Risks of Portfolios

You are interviewing two investment managers. Mr. Wong shows that the average return on his portfolio
for the past 10 years has been 14%, with a standard deviation of 8% and a beta of 1.2. Ms. Petrov shows that
the average return on her portfolio for the past 10 years has been 16%, with a standard deviation of 10%
and a beta of 1.6. You know that over the past 10 years, the US Treasury security rate has averaged 2% and
the return on the S&P 500 has averaged 11%. Which portfolio manager do you think has done the better
job?

Solution:

The Sharpe ratio for Mr. Wong's portfolio is        , and the Treynor ratio is  . The
Sharpe ratio for Ms. Petrov's portfolio is     , and the Treynor ratio is       .

Jensen's alpha for Mr. Wong's portfolio is

Jensen's alpha for Ms. Petrov's portfolio is

All three measures of portfolio performance suggest that Mr. Wong's portfolio has performed better than
Ms. Petrov's has. Although Ms. Petrov has had a larger average return, the portfolio she manages is riskier.
Ms. Petrov's portfolio is more volatile than Mr. Wong's, resulting in a higher standard deviation. Ms.
Petrov's portfolio has a higher beta, which means it has a higher amount of systematic risk. The CAPM
suggests that a portfolio with a beta of 1.6 should have an expected return of 16.4%. Because Ms. Petrov's

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                    15.5 · Using Excel to Make Investment Decisions 467

  portfolio has an average return of less than that, investors in Ms. Petrov's portfolio are not rewarded for the
  risk that they have taken as much as would be expected.

 15.5 Using Excel to Make Investment Decisions

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Calculate the average return and standard deviation for a stock.
  · Calculate the average return and standard deviation for a portfolio.
  · Calculate the beta of a stock.

Average Return and Standard Deviation for a Single Stock

Excel can be used to calculate the average returns and the standard deviation of returns for both a single stock
and a portfolio of stocks. It can also be used to calculate the beta for a stock. Historic stock price data for
stocks you are interested in analyzing can easily be downloaded from sites such as Yahoo! Finance into Excel.
The examples in this section use monthly stock data from December 2017 to December 2020 from Yahoo!
Finance.
Monthly price data for AMZN (Amazon) is shown in column B of Figure 15.4. To begin, monthly returns must be
calculated from the price data using the formula

The ending prices shown in Figure 15.4 are the last price the stock traded for each month. Each month, the
return is calculated under the assumption that you purchased the stock at the last trading price of the
previous month and sold at the last price of the current month. Thus, the return for January 2018 is calculated
as

This is accomplished in Excel by placing the formula =(B3-B2)/B2 in cell C3. This formula can then be copied
down the spreadsheet through row C38. Now that each monthly return is in column C, you can calculate the
average of the monthly returns in cell C39 and the standard deviation of returns in cell C40.
468 15 · How to Think about Investing

            Figure 15.4 Calculating the Average Return and the Standard Deviation of Returns for AMZN (data source: Yahoo! Finance)

       Over the three-year period, the average monthly return for AMZN was 3.3%. However, this return was highly
       volatile, with a standard deviation of 9.33%. Remember that this means that approximately two-thirds of the
       time, the monthly return from AMZN was between -6.03% and 12.63%.

                Download the spreadsheet file (https://openstax.org/r/google_spread_sheet) containing key Chapter 15
                Excel exhibits.

      Average Return and Standard Deviation for a Portfolio

       The Excel screenshot in Figure 15.5 shows the return and standard deviation calculation for a portfolio. This
       sample four-stock portfolio contains AMZN, CVS, AAPL (Apple), and NFLX (Netflix). This portfolio is constructed
       as an equally weighted portfolio; because there are four stocks in this portfolio, each has a weight of 25%.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                15.5 · Using Excel to Make Investment Decisions 469

         Figure 15.5 Calculation of the Average Return and Standard Deviation for a Portfolio (data source: Yahoo! Finance)

The monthly returns for each stock are recorded in their respective columns. The portfolio return for each
month is calculated as the weighted average of the four monthly individual stock returns. The formula for the
portfolio return is

The formula =$B$1*B3+$C$1*C3+$D$1*D3+$E$1*E3 is placed in cell F3. The formula is then copied down
column F to calculate the portfolio return for each month. After the monthly portfolio return is calculated, then
the average monthly portfolio return is calculated in cell F39. The average monthly portfolio return is 2.69%.

Because this is an equally weighted portfolio, with each of the four stocks impacting the portfolio return in the

same way, the average monthly portfolio return of 2.69% is the same as the sum of the average monthly

returns of the four stocks divided by four, or  .

The standard deviation of the monthly portfolio returns is calculated in cell F40. This four-stock portfolio has a
standard deviation of 7.10%. Unlike the average return, this standard deviation is not equal to the average of
the standard deviations of returns of the four stocks. In fact, the standard deviation for the portfolio is less
than the standard deviation for any one of the four stocks. Remember that this occurs because the stock
returns are not perfectly positively correlated. The high return of one of the stocks in one month is dampened
by a lower return in another stock during the same month. Likewise, a negative return in one stock during a
month might be offset by a positive return in one of the other three stocks during the same month. This is the
risk reduction benefit of holding a portfolio of stocks.

Calculating Beta

The standard deviation of a stock's returns indicates the stock's volatility. Remember that the volatility is
caused by both firm-specific and systematic risk. Investors will not be rewarded for firm-specific risk because
470 15 · How to Think about Investing

       they can diversify away from it. Investors are, however, rewarded for systematic risk. To determine how much
       of a firm's risk is due to systematic risk, you can use Excel to calculate the stock's beta.
       To calculate a stock's beta, you need the monthly return for the market in addition to the monthly market
       return for the stock. In column B in Figure 15.6, the monthly return for SPY, the SPDR S&P 500 Trust, is
       recorded. SPY is an ETF that was created to mimic the performance of the S&P 500 index by State Street Global
       Advisors and is often used as a proxy for the overall market performance. The monthly returns for AMZN are
       visible in column C. It is important that these returns be lined up so that the returns for a particular month for
       both securities appear in the same row number. Also, you want to place the returns for SPY in the column to
       the left of the returns for AMZN so that when you create your graph, SPY will automatically appear on the
       horizontal axis.

       LINK TO LEARNING
       State Street Global Advisors

         You can learn more about State Street Global Advisors and its creation of the first ETF by visiting the
         company's history page at its website (ssga.com) (https://openstax.org/r/ssga_institutional_our-history).

       You will use a scatter plot to create a graph. In Excel, go to the Insert tab, and then from the Chart menu,
       choose the first scatter plot option.

                                                Figure 15.6 Excel Format for Calculating Beta (data source: Yahoo! Finance)

       Selecting the scatter plot option will result in a chart being inserted that looks like the chart in Figure 15.7. Each
       dot represents one month's combination of returns, with the return for SPY measured on the horizontal axis
       and the return for AMZN measured on the vertical axis. Consider, for example, the dot in the furthest upper
       right-hand section of the figure. This dot is the plot of returns for the month of April 2020, when the return for
       SPY was 13.36% (measured on the horizontal axis) and the return for AMZN was 26.89% (measured on the

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                    15.5 · Using Excel to Make Investment Decisions 471

vertical axis).
Hover your mouse over one of the dots, and right-click the dot to pull up a chart formatting menu. This menu
will allow you to add labels to your axis and polish your chart in additional ways if you would like. Select the
option Add Trendline.

Figure 15.7 Creating a Scatter Plot in Excel (data source: Yahoo! Finance)

When the trendline is inserted, a formatting box will appear on the right of your screen (see Figure 15.8). If it is

not already selected, choose the Linear trendline option. Scroll down and select the "Display Equation on

chart" option. You will see the equation    appear on the screen. This is the equation

for the best-fit line that shows how AMZN moves when the market moves. The slope of this line, 1.1477, is the

beta for AMZN. This tells you that for every 10% move the overall market makes, AMZN tends to move

11.477%. Because AMZN tends to move a little more than the broader market, it has a little more systematic

risk than the average stock in the market.

Figure 15.8 Inserting a Trendline to Determine Beta (data source: Yahoo! Finance)
472 15 · Summary

     Summary

15.1 Risk and Return to an Individual Asset

Investors are interested in both the return they can expect to receive when making an investment and the risk
associated with that investment. In finance, risk is considered the volatility of the return from time period to
time period. Historical returns are measured by the arithmetic average, and the risk is measured by the
standard deviation of returns.

15.2 Risk and Return to Multiple Assets

As investors hold multiple assets in a portfolio, they are able to eliminate firm-specific risk. However,
systematic or market risk remains, even if an investor holds the market portfolio. The return to a portfolio is
measured by the arithmetic average, and the risk is measured by the standard deviation of the returns of the
portfolio. The risk of the portfolio will be lower than the weighted average of the risk of the individual
securities because the returns of the securities are not perfectly correlated. A low or negative return for one
stock in a period can be offset by a high return for another stock in the same period.

15.3 The Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM)

The capital asset pricing model (CAPM) relates the expected return of an asset to the systematic risk of that
asset. Investors will be rewarded for taking on systematic risk. They will not be rewarded for taking on firm-
specific risk, however, because that risk can be diversified away.

15.4 Applications in Performance Measurement

Because investors are not simply interested in returns but are also interested in risk, the success of a portfolio
cannot be measured simply by considering the portfolio's return. In order to compare investment portfolios,
risk and return must both be taken into consideration. The Sharpe ratio and the Treynor ratio are two
measures that provide a reward-to-risk measure of a portfolio. Jensen's alpha provides a measure of the
abnormal return of a portfolio, considering the portfolio's risk level.

15.5 Using Excel to Make Investment Decisions

Using Excel to manipulate publicly available stock data makes calculating the average return of a stock and the
standard deviation of returns easy. The average return for a portfolio and the standard deviation of the
portfolio returns can also be calculated easily. By comparing the returns of a stock with the returns of the
overall market using Excel charting tools, the beta for a stock, which measures systematic risk, can be
determined.

     Key Terms

arithmetic average return the sum of an asset's annual returns over a number of years divided by the
    number of years

beta a measure of how a stock moves relative to the market
capital asset pricing model (CAPM) the expected return of a security, equal to the risk-free rate plus a

    premium for the amount of risk taken
capital gain yield the difference between the price a stock is sold for and the price that was originally paid

    for it divided by the price originally paid
diversification holding a variety of assets in a portfolio
dividend yield the total dividends received by the owner of a share of stock divided by the price originally

    paid for the stock
effective annual rate (EAR) returns expressed on an annualized or yearly basis; allows for the comparison

    of various investments
firm-specific risk the risk that an event may impact the expected revenue or costs of a firm, thereby

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          15 · CFA Institute 473

    impacting the returns to investors; also known as diversifiable risk
geometric average return the compound annual return derived from the effective annual rate and time

    value of money formulas
holding period percentage return the gain received from holding a stock, calculated by adding the amount

    received when the stock is sold to any dividends earned while holding the stock, subtracting the price
    originally paid for the stock, then dividing the difference by the price originally paid
Jensen's alpha a measure of portfolio performance, calculated as the raw portfolio return minus the
    expected portfolio return predicted by the CAPM
market risk premium the reward for taking on the average amount of market risk
portfolio a collection of owned stocks
realized return the total return of an investment that occurs over a particular time period
risk premium the extra return earned by taking on risk
risk-free rate the reward for lending money when there is no risk of not receiving the principal and interest
    as promised
Sharpe ratio a reward-to-risk measure of portfolio performance, calculated by subtracting the risk-free rate
    from the average portfolio return and then dividing by the standard deviation of the portfolio
systematic risk risk that impacts the entire market and cannot be diversified away; also known as market
    risk
Treynor ratio a reward-to-risk measure of portfolio performance, calculated by subtracting the risk-free rate
    from the average portfolio return and then dividing by the beta of the portfolio

     CFA Institute

This chapter supports some of the Learning Outcome Statements (LOS) in this CFA® Level I Study Session
(https://openstax.org/r/cfa-inst-study-session). Reference with permission of CFA Institute.

     Multiple Choice

 1. The total dollar return equals _______________.
      a. the EPS of a stock
      b. capital gains income plus dividend income
       c. the price paid for a share of stock minus the selling price of the stock
      d. the price paid for a share of stock divided by the selling price of the stock

 2. The dividend yield is calculated by _______________.
      a. dividing the price of the stock by the EPS
      b. subtracting any capital loss from the capital gain
       c. dividing the annual dividend by the initial stock price
      d. dividing the annual dividend by the net income for the year

 3. Which of the following is the best example of firm-specific risk?
      a. A global pandemic causes major disruptions in the economy.
      b. The Federal Reserve increases the money supply dramatically, leading to massive inflation.
       c. AAA Pharmaceuticals withdraws a medication as it studies whether strokes five people suffered after
           taking the medication were related to the medication.
      d. As an arctic blast descends on North America, most of the United States is blanketed in snow or ice.

 4. Investors diversify their portfolio in order to _______________.
      a. reduce risk
      b. increase risk
474 15 · Review Questions

       c. increase return
      d. increase the standard deviation

 5. Which of the following would be the best example of systematic risk?
      a. An error in the company's computer system miscalculates the amount of inventory that Monique's
           Boutique is holding.
      b. BlueJay Air has a reduction in new reservations following a crash of one of its jets.
       c. The spokesperson for Serena's Sports Shoes is involved in an ethical scandal.
      d. Interest rates rise after the Federal Reserve announces it will slow down the rate of growth of the
           money supply.

 6. As the number of stocks in a portfolio increases, _______________.
      a. firm-specific risk increases
      b. systematic risk becomes zero
       c. systematic risk decreases and returns increase
      d. firm-specific risk is reduced but systematic risk remains

 7. Beta is a measure of _______________.
      a. systematic risk
      b. firm-specific risk
       c. a firm's profitability
      d. a stock's dividend yield

 8. Which of the following would be the best estimate of the risk-free rate?
      a. The rate of inflation
      b. The average return on the S&P 500
       c. The average return on Amazon's stock
      d. The average return on US Treasury bills

 9. The Sharpe ratio can be considered a measure of _______________.
      a. the reward of an investment in relation to the risk
      b. the systematic risk of a stock
       c. the total return of a stock investment
      d. the historical return of an individual security

10. A positive Jensen's alpha indicates that a portfolio has _______________.
       a. a negative beta
      b. an abnormal return
       c. more total risk than the average portfolio
      d. more systematic risk than the average portfolio

11. If an equally weighted portfolio contains 10 stocks, then _______________.
       a. the stocks in the portfolio will each have a weight of 0.10
      b. the return of the portfolio must be multiplied by 10 to get the annualized return
       c. the standard deviation of the portfolio will be one-tenth the standard deviation of one of the stocks
      d. the standard deviation of the portfolio will be 10 times the standard deviation of one of the stocks

     Review Questions

 1. What is the difference between firm-specific risk and unsystematic risk?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                 15 · Problems 475

2. Explain why diversification reduces unsystematic risk but not systematic risk.

3. Explain what happens to the standard deviation of returns of a portfolio as the number of stocks in the
    portfolio increases.

4. Enrique owns five stocks: Alaska Airlines, American Airlines, Delta Airlines, Southwest Airlines, and Ford.
    Radha also owns five stocks: Apple, McDonald's, Tesla, Facebook, and Disney. Does Enrique or Radha have
    a more diversified portfolio?

5. You are considering purchasing shares in a company that has a beta of 0.8. Explain what this beta means.

6. Explain how the Sharpe ratio and the Treynor ratio can be considered reward-to-risk measures.

Problems

1. You purchase 100 shares of COST (Costco) for $280 per share. Three months later, you sell the stock for
    $290 per share. You receive a dividend of $0.57 a share. What is your total dollar return?

2. You purchase 100 shares of COST for $280 per share. Three months later, you sell the stock for $290 per
    share. You receive a dividend of $0.57 a share. What are your dividend yield, capital gain yield, and total
    percentage return?

3. You purchase 100 shares of COST for $280 per share. Three months later, you sell the stock for $290 per
    share. You receive a dividend of $0.57 a share. What is the EAR of your investment?

4. You invest in a stock for four years. The returns for the four years are 20%, -10%, 15%, and -5%. Calculate
    the arithmetic average return and the geometric average return.

5. You are considering purchasing shares in a company that has a beta of 0.9. The average return for the S&P
    500 is 11%, and the average return for US Treasury bills has been 2%. Based on the CAPM, what is your
    expected return for the stock?

6. Your portfolio has had a 15% rate of return with a standard deviation of 18% and a beta of 1.1. The average
    return for the S&P 500 has been 11%, and the average return for US Treasury bills has been 2%. Calculate
    the Sharpe ratio, Treynor ratio, and Jensen's alpha for your portfolio.

7. The monthly returns for Visa (V) and Pfizer (PFE) for 2018-2020 are provided in the chart below. In
    addition, the monthly return for the SPDR S&P 500 ETF Trust (SPY) is provided; SPY is often used as a proxy
    for the returns of the S&P 500, or a broad market index. Using Excel, calculate the arithmetic average
    monthly returns for V, PFE, and SPY. Also, calculate the standard deviation of returns for each of V, PFE,
    and SPY.
                                            Monthly Returns for SPY, V, and PFE for 2018-2020

          Date         SPY       V       PFE
          Jan-18       0.0618   0.0895   0.0226
          Feb-18      -0.0364  -0.0104  -0.0197
          Mar-18      -0.0313  -0.0253  -0.0135
          Apr-18       0.0092   0.0607   0.0316
          May-18       0.0243   0.0303  -0.0186
          Jun-18       0.0013   0.0149   0.0196
          Jul-18       0.0417   0.0324   0.1006

          Table 15.8
476 15 · Video Activity

                                 Date         SPY       V       PFE
                                 Aug-18       0.0319   0.0742   0.0398
                                 Sep-18       0.0014   0.0233   0.0705
                                 Oct-18      -0.0649  -0.0816  -0.0229
                                 Nov-18       0.0185   0.0280   0.0736
                                 Dec-18      -0.0933  -0.0673  -0.0485
                                 Jan-19       0.0864   0.0233  -0.0275
                                 Feb-19       0.0324   0.0971   0.0301
                                 Mar-19       0.0136   0.0563  -0.0203
                                 Apr-19       0.0454   0.0528  -0.0438
                                 May-19      -0.0638  -0.0189   0.0224
                                 Jun-19       0.0644   0.0774   0.0526
                                 Jul-19       0.0201   0.0256  -0.1034
                                 Aug-19      -0.0167   0.0158  -0.0847
                                 Sep-19       0.0148  -0.0473   0.0201
                                 Oct-19       0.0268   0.0398   0.0679
                                 Nov-19       0.0362   0.0316   0.0039
                                 Dec-19       0.0240   0.0201   0.0270
                                 Jan-20       0.0045   0.0589  -0.0495
                                 Feb-20      -0.0792  -0.0865  -0.0934
                                 Mar-20      -0.1300  -0.1123  -0.0233
                                 Apr-20       0.1336   0.1092   0.1752
                                 May-20       0.0476   0.0924  -0.0044
                                 Jun-20       0.0133  -0.0089  -0.1352
                                 Jul-20       0.0636  -0.0143   0.1768
                                 Aug-20       0.0698   0.1134  -0.0083
                                 Sep-20      -0.0413  -0.0553  -0.0288
                                 Oct-20      -0.0210  -0.0913  -0.0332
                                 Nov-20       0.1088   0.1576   0.1381
                                 Dec-20       0.0326   0.0414  -0.0293

                                 Table 15.8

 8. Using the monthly returns provided in the table in problem 7, use Excel to calculate the beta for V and the
     beta for PFE. Which of these stocks has more systematic risk? What would you expect for the comparative
     returns of V and PFE?

     Video Activity

How to Double Your Money in Seven Years
Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/double_your_money)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         15 · Video Activity 477

In this video, Jim Cramer explains how compounding can help investors build and preserve wealth. He
provides suggestions for how young people can use the stock market to build financial independence.

 1. According to Jim Cramer, if you invest $1,000 in the S&P 500, how much can you expect your investment to
     be worth in 35 years?

 2. Gather data over the past 10 years for the level of the S&P 500. How many of those years did the S&P 500
     have a return of at least 10%? If you had invested in $1,000 in an S&P 500 index fund 10 years ago, would
     you have doubled your money yet? Is your answer consistent with Jim Cramer's message?

John Bogle and the Buy-and-Hold Strategy

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/grow_with_America)
In this video, the legendary investor Jack Bogle, founder and former CEO of Vanguard, discusses strategies for
investors.

 3. When discussing following a buy-and-hold strategy, in which an investor makes a purchase and holds the
     same investment for the long term, Bogle says that the success of such a strategy depends on what is
     bought. What distinction does Bogle make between buying and holding an individual stock and buying
     and holding a broad-based index fund?

 4. How would you describe Bogle's attitude toward risk in the stock market? Do you agree with this attitude?
     Why or why not?
478 15 · Video Activity
Access for free at openstax.org
16 · Why It Matters                                                                                                               479

16
              How Companies Think about Investing

Figure 16.1 Companies make decisions about investments every day. (credit: modification of "Tesla Factory, Fremont (CA, USA)" by
Maurizio Pesce/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline

  16.1 Payback Period Method
  16.2 Net Present Value (NPV) Method
  16.3 Internal Rate of Return (IRR) Method
  16.4 Alternative Methods
  16.5 Choosing between Projects
  16.6 Using Excel to Make Company Investment Decisions

      Why It Matters

One of the most important decisions a company faces is choosing which investments it should make. Should
an automobile manufacturer purchase a new robot for its assembly line? Should an airline purchase a new
plane to add to its fleet? Should a hotel chain build a new hotel in Atlanta? Should a bakery purchase tables
and chairs to provide places for customers to eat? Should a pharmaceutical company spend money on
research for a new vaccine? All of these questions involve spending money today to make money in the future.

The process of making these decisions is often referred to as capital budgeting. In order to grow and remain
competitive, a firm relies on developing new products, improving existing products, and entering new
markets. These new ventures require investments in fixed assets. The company must decide whether the
project will generate enough cash to cover the costs of these initial expenditures once the project is up and
running.

For example, Sam's Sporting Goods sells sporting equipment and uniforms to players on local recreational and
school teams. Customers have been inquiring about customizing items such as baseball caps and equipment
bags with logos and other designs. Sam's is considering purchasing an embroidery machine so that it can
provide these customized items in-house. The machine will cost $16,000. Purchasing the embroidery machine
would be an investment in a fixed asset. If it purchases the machine, Sam's will be able to charge customers
for customization.
480 16 · How Companies Think about Investing

The managers think that selling customized items will allow the company to increase its cash flow by $2,000
next year. They predict that as customers become more aware of this service, the ability to customize products
in-house will increase the company's cash flow by $4,000 the following year. The managers expect the
machine will be used for five years, with the embroidery products increasing cash flows by $5,000 during each
of the last three years the machine is used. Should Sam's Sporting Goods invest in the embroidery machine?
In this chapter, we consider the main capital budgeting techniques Sam's and other companies can use to
evaluate these types of decisions.

 16.1 Payback Period Method

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Define payback period.
  · Calculate payback period.
  · List the advantages and disadvantages of using the payback period method.

The payback period method provides a simple calculation that the managers at Sam's Sporting Goods can use
to evaluate whether to invest in the embroidery machine. The payback period calculation focuses on how
long it will take for a company to make enough free cash flow from the investment to recover the initial cost of
the investment.

Payback Period Calculation

In order to purchase the embroidery machine, Sam's Sporting Goods must spend $16,000. During the first
year, Sam's expects to see a $2,000 benefit from purchasing the machine, but this means that after one year,
the company will have spent $14,000 more than it has made from the project. During the second year that it
uses the machine, Sam's expects that its cash inflow will be $4,000 greater than it would have been if it had not
had the machine. Thus, after two years, the company will have spent $10,000 more than it has benefited from
the machine. This process is continued year after year until the accumulated increase in cash flow is $16,000,
or equal to the original investment. The process is summarized in Table 16.1.

                                 Year         0  1  2  3                          4  5

Initial Investment ($) (16,000)

Cash Inflow ($)                                  - 2,000 4,000 5,000 5,000 5,000

Accumulated Inflow ($)                           - 2,000 6,000 11,000 16,000 21,000

Balance ($)                                   (16,000) (14,000) (10,000) (5,000)     - 5,000

Table 16.1

Sam's Sporting Goods is expecting its cash inflow to increase by $16,000 over the first four years of using the
embroidery machine. Thus, the payback period for the embroidery machine is four years. In other words, it
takes four years to accumulate $16,000 in cash inflow from the embroidery machine and recover the cost of
the machine.

 LINK TO LEARNING

 Calculating the Payback Period

  It is possible that a project will not fully recover the initial cost in one year but will have more than
  recovered its initial cost by the following year. In these cases, the payback period will not be an integer but

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            16.1 · Payback Period Method 481

will contain a fraction of a year. This video demonstrates how to calculate the payback period
(https://openstax.org/r/how-to-calculate) in such a situation.

Advantages

The principal advantage of the payback period method is its simplicity. It can be calculated quickly and easily.
It is easy for managers who have little finance training to understand. The payback measure provides
information about how long funds will be tied up in a project. The shorter the payback period of a project, the
greater the project's liquidity.

Disadvantages

Although it is simple to calculate, the payback period method has several shortcomings. First, the payback
period calculation ignores the time value of money. Suppose that in addition to the embroidery machine,
Sam's is considering several other projects. The cash flows from these projects are shown in Table 16.2. Both
Project B and Project C have a payback period of five years. For both of these projects, Sam's estimates that it
will take five years for cash inflows to add up to $16,000. The payback period method does not differentiate
between these two projects.

Year        0  123456

Project A ($) (16,000) 2,000 4,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000

Project B ($) (16,000) 1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000 6,000  -

Project C ($) (16,000) 6,000 4,000 3,000 2,000 1,000  -

Project D ($) (16,000) 1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000 6,000 8,000

Table 16.2

However, we know that money has a time value, and receiving $6,000 in year 1 (as occurs in Project C) is
preferable to receiving $6,000 in year 5 (as in Projects B and D). From what we learned about the time value of
money, Projects B and C are not identical projects. The payback period method breaks the important finance
rule of not adding or comparing cash flows that occur in different time periods.

A second disadvantage of using the payback period method is that there is not a clearly defined acceptance or
rejection criterion. When the payback period method is used, a company will set a length of time in which a
project must recover the initial investment for the project to be accepted. Projects with longer payback periods
than the length of time the company has chosen will be rejected. If Sam's were to set a payback period of four
years, Project A would be accepted, but Projects B, C, and D have payback periods of five years and so would
be rejected. Sam's choice of a payback period of four years would be arbitrary; it is not grounded in any
financial reasoning or theory. No argument exists for a company to use a payback period of three, four, five, or
any other number of years as its criterion for accepting projects.

A third drawback of this method is that cash flows after the payback period are ignored. Projects B, C, and D all
have payback periods of five years. However, Projects B and C end after year 5, while Project D has a large cash
flow that occurs in year 6, which is excluded from the analysis. The payback method is shortsighted in that it
favors projects that generate cash flows quickly while possibly rejecting projects that create much larger cash
flows after the arbitrary payback time criterion.

Fourth, no risk adjustment is made for uncertain cash flows. No matter how careful the planning and analysis,
a business is seldom sure what future cash flows will be. Some projects are riskier than others, with less
certain cash flows, but the payback period method treats high-risk cash flows the same way as low-risk cash
flows.
482 16 · How Companies Think about Investing

 16.2 Net Present Value (NPV) Method

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Define net present value.
  · Calculate net present value.
  · List the advantages and disadvantages of using the net present value method.
  · Graph an NPV profile.

Net Present Value (NPV) Calculation

Sam's purchasing of the embroidery machine involves spending money today in the hopes of making more
money in the future. Because the cash inflows and outflows occur in different time periods, they cannot be
directly compared to each other. Instead, they must be translated into a common time period using time value
of money techniques. By converting all of the cash flows that will occur from a project into present value, or
current dollars, the cash inflows from the project can be compared to the cash outflows. If the cash inflows
exceed the cash outflows in present value terms, the project will add value and should be accepted. The
difference between the present value of the cash inflows and the present value of cash outflows is known as
net present value (NPV).

The equation for NPV can be written as

Consider Sam's Sporting Goods' decision of whether to purchase the embroidery machine. If we assume that
after six years the embroidery machine will be obsolete and the project will end, when placed on a timeline,
the project's expected cash flow is shown in Table 16.3:

Year                                          0  123456

Cash Flow ($) (16,000) 2,000 4,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000

Table 16.3

Calculating NPV is simply a time value of money problem in which each cash flow is discounted back to the
present value. If we assume that the cost of funds for Sam's is 9%, then the NPV can be calculated as

Because the NPV is positive, Sam's Sporting Goods should purchase the embroidery machine. The value of the
firm will increase by $2,835.63 as a result of accepting the project.
Calculating NPV involves computing the present value of each cash flow and then summing the present values
of all cash flows from the project. This project has six future cash flows, so six present values must be
computed. Although this is not difficult, it is tedious.
A financial calculator is able to calculate a series of present values in the background for you, automating
much of the process. You simply have to provide the calculator with each cash flow, the time period in which
each cash flow occurs, and the discount rate that you want to use to discount the future cash flows to the
present.
Follow the steps in Table 16.4 for calculating NPV:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                  16.2 · Net Present Value (NPV) Method 483

Step           Description                 Enter          Display

1 Select cash flow worksheet          CF          CF0     XXXX

2 Clear the cash flow worksheet       2ND [CLR WORK] CF0           0

3 Enter initial cash flow             16000 +/- ENTER CF0 = -16,000.00

4 Enter cash flow for the first year  2000 ENTER C01 = 2,000.00

                                                  F01 =            1.0

5 Enter cash flow for the second year  4000 ENTER C02 = 4,000.00

                                                  F02 =            1.0

6 Enter cash flow for the third year  5000 ENTER C03 = 5,000.00

                                                  F03 =            1.0

7 Enter cash flow for the fourth year  5000 ENTER C04 = 5,000.00

                                                  F04 =            1.0

8 Enter cash flow for the fifth year  5000 ENTER C05 = 5,000.00

                                                  F05 =            1.0

9 Enter cash flow for the sixth year  5000 ENTER C06 = 5,000.00

                                                  F06 =            1.0

10 Select NPV                         NPV         I                0.00

11 Enter discount rate                9 ENTER     I =              9.00

12 Compute NPV                         CPT        NPV = 2,835.63

Table 16.4 Calculator Steps for NPV1

LINK TO LEARNING

Net Present Value

This video provides another example of how to use NPV (https://openstax.org/r/how-to-use-NPV) to
evaluate whether a project should be accepted or rejected.

Advantages

The NPV method solves several of the listed problems with the payback period approach. First, the NPV
method uses the time value of money concept. All of the cash flows are discounted back to their present value
to be compared. Second, the NPV method provides a clear decision criterion. Projects with a positive NPV
should be accepted, and projects with a negative NPV should be rejected. Third, the discount rate used to
discount future cash flows to the present can be increased or decreased to adjust for the riskiness of the
project's cash flows.

Disadvantages

The NPV method can be difficult for someone without a finance background to understand. Also, the NPV
method can be problematic when available capital resources are limited. The NPV method provides a criterion

1 The specific financial calculator in these examples is the Texas Instruments BA II PlusTM Professional model, but you can use other
financial calculators for these types of calculations.
484 16 · How Companies Think about Investing

for whether or not a project is a good project. It does not always provide a good solution when a company
must make a choice between several acceptable projects because funds are not available to pursue them all.

THINK IT THROUGH

Calculating NVP

Suppose your company is considering a project that will cost $30,000 this year. The cash inflow from this
project is expected to be $6,000 next year and $8,000 the following year. The cash inflow is expected to
increase by $2,000 yearly, resulting in a cash inflow of $18,000 in year 7, the final year of the project. You
know that your company's cost of funds is 9%. Use a financial calculator to calculate NPV to determine
whether this is a good project for your company to undertake (see Table 16.5).

Solution:

           Step                  Description           Enter          Display

                 1 Select cash flow worksheet     CF          CF0     XXXX

                 2 Clear the cash flow worksheet  2ND [CLR WORK] CF0           0

                 3 Enter initial cash flow        30000 +/- ENTER CF0 = -30,000.00

                 4 Enter cash flow for the first year  6000 ENTER C01 = 6,000.00

                                                              F01 =            1.0

                 5 Enter cash flow for the second year  8000 ENTER C02 = 8,000.00

                                                              F02 =            1.0

                 6 Enter cash flow for the third year  10000 ENTER C03 = 10,000.00

                                                              F03 =            1.0

                 7 Enter cash flow for the fourth year  12000 ENTER C04 = 12,000.00

                                                              F04 =            1.0

                 8 Enter cash flow for the fifth year  14000 ENTER C05 = 14,000.00

                                                              F05 =            1.0

                 9 Enter cash flow for the sixth year  16000 ENTER C06 = 16,000.00

                                                              F06 =            1.0

                 10 Enter cash flow for the seventh year  18000 ENTER C07 = 18,000.00

                                                              F07 =            1.0

                 11 Select NPV                    NPV         I                0.00

                 12 Enter discount rate           9 ENTER     I =              9.00

                 13 Compute NPV                    CPT        NPV = 26,946.90

           Table 16.5 Calculator Steps for NPV

The NPV for this project is $26,946.90. Undertaking this project will add a net present value of $26,946.90;
therefore, this is a good project that should be undertaken.

Access for free at openstax.org
                            16.2 · Net Present Value (NPV) Method 485

LINK TO LEARNING

Calculating the NPV of an MBA Program

The NPV calculation can be used as a decision tool when you are deciding whether you should spend
money today to make money in the future. This website on calculating the NPV on an MBA degree
(https://openstax.org/r/calculating-the-NPV) lets you apply this concept in an educational setting. The
initial cost of the MBA includes both the dollars spent on tuition and the wages that a full-time student
could have earned if they were not in school. Why is it appropriate to include these forgone wages in the
calculation? What adjustments would students need to make to this analysis if they wanted to consider
attending a part-time MBA program that allowed them to continue working while completing the program?

NPV Profile

The NPV of a project depends on the expected cash flows from the project and the discount rate used to
translate those expected cash flows to the present value. When we used a 9% discount rate, the NPV of the
embroidery machine project was $2,836. If a higher discount rate is used, the present value of future cash
flows falls, and the NPV of the project falls.

Theoretically, we should use the firm's cost to attract capital as the discount rate when calculating NPV. In
reality, it is difficult to estimate this cost of capital accurately and confidently. Because the discount rate is an
approximate value, we want to determine whether a small error in our estimate is important to our overall
conclusion. We can do this by creating an NPV profile, which graphs the NPV at a variety of discount rates and
allows us to determine how sensitive the NPV is to changes in the discount rate.

To construct an NPV profile for Sam's, select several discount rates and compute the NPV for the embroidery
machine project using each of those discount rates. Table 16.6 below shows the NPV for several discount rates.
Notice that if the discount rate is zero, the NPV is simply the sum of the cash flows. As the discount rate
becomes larger, the NPV falls and eventually becomes negative.

The information in Table 16.6 is presented in a graph in Figure 16.2. We can see that the graph crosses the
horizontal axis at about 14%. To the left, or at lower discount rates, the NPV is positive. If you are confident
that the firm's cost of attracting funds is less than 14%, the company should accept the project. If the cost of
capital is more than 14%, however, the NPV is negative, and the company should reject the project.

Discount Rate NPV ($)

0%   10,000

3%   7,231

9%   2,836

12%  1,081

14%  42

15%  (442)

18%  (1,773)

21%  (2,939)

Table 16.6 NPV for Various
Discount Rates
486 16 · How Companies Think about Investing

16.3                                                         Figure 16.2 NPV Profile Graph

      Internal Rate of Return (IRR) Method

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Define internal rate of return (IRR).
  · Calculate internal rate of return.
  · List advantages and disadvantages of using the internal rate of return method.

Internal Rate of Return (IRR) Calculation

The internal rate of return (IRR) is the discount rate that sets the present value of the cash inflows equal to
the present value of the cash outflows. In considering whether Sam's Sporting Goods should purchase the
embroidery machine, the IRR method approaches the time value of money problem from a slightly different
angle. Instead of using the company's cost of attracting funds for the discount rate and solving for NPV, as we
did in the first NPV equation, we set NPV equal to zero and solve for the discount rate to find the IRR:

The IRR is the discount rate at which the NPV profile graph crosses the horizontal axis. If the IRR is greater
than the cost of capital, a project should be accepted. If the IRR is less than the cost of capital, a project should
be rejected. The NPV profile graph for the embroidery machine crossed the horizontal axis at 14%. Therefore,
if Sam's Sporting Goods can attract capital for less than 14%, the IRR exceeds the cost of capital and the
embroidery machine should be purchased. However, if it costs Sam's more than 14% to attract capital, the
embroidery machine should not be purchased.

In other words, a company wants to accept projects that have an IRR that exceed the company's cost of
attracting funds. The cash flow from these projects will be great enough to cover the cost of attracting money
from investors in addition to the other costs of the project. A company should reject any project that has an
IRR less than the company's cost of attracting funds; the cash flows from such a project are not enough to
compensate the investors for the use of their funds.

Calculating IRR without a financial calculator is an arduous, time-consuming process that requires trial and
error to find the discount rate that makes NPV exactly equal zero. Your calculator uses the same type of trial-
and-error iterative process, but because it uses an automated process, it can do so much more quickly than
you can. A problem that might require 30 minutes of detailed mathematical calculations by hand can be

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                16.3 · Internal Rate of Return (IRR) Method 487

completed in a matter of seconds with the assistance of a financial calculator.

All the information your calculator needs to calculate IRR is the value of each cash flow and the time period in
which it occurs. To calculate IRR, begin by entering the cash flows for the project, just as you do for the NPV
calculation (see Table 16.7). After these cash flows are entered, simply compute IRR in the final step.

Step  Description                        Enter                                   Display

1 Select cash flow worksheet         CF         CF0                              XXXX

2 Clear the cash flow worksheet      2ND [CLR WORK] CF0                                   0

3 Enter initial cash flow            16000 +/- ENTER CF0 = -16,000.00

4 Enter cash flow for the first year  2000 ENTER C01 = 2,000.00

                                                F01 =                                     1.0

5 Enter cash flow for the second year  4000 ENTER C02 = 4,000.00

                                                F02 =                                     1.0

6 Enter cash flow for the third year  5000 ENTER C03 = 5,000.00

                                                F03 =                                     1.0

7 Enter cash flow for the fourth year  5000 ENTER C04 = 5,000.00

                                                F04 =                                     1.0

8 Enter cash flow for the fifth year  5000 ENTER C05 = 5,000.00

                                                F05 =                                     1.0

9 Enter cash flow for the sixth year  5000 ENTER C06 = 5,000.00

                                                F06 =                                     1.0

10 Compute IRR                       IRR CPT    IRR =                            14.09

Table 16.7 Calculator Steps for IRR

Advantages

The primary advantage of using the IRR method is that it is easy to interpret and explain. Investors like to
speak in terms of annual percentage returns when evaluating investment possibilities.

Disadvantages

One disadvantage of using IRR is that it can be tedious to calculate. We knew the IRR was about 14% for the
embroidery machine project because we had previously calculated the NPV for several discount rates. The IRR
is about, but not exactly, 14%, because NPV is not exactly equal to zero (just very close to zero) when we use
14% as the discount rate. Before the prevalence of financial calculators and spreadsheets, calculating the exact
IRR was difficult and time-consuming. With today's technology, this is no longer a major consideration. Later
in this chapter, we will look at how to use a spreadsheet to do these calculations.

No Single Mathematical Solution. Another disadvantage of using the IRR method is that there may not be a
single mathematical solution to an IRR problem. This can happen when negative cash flows occur in more than
one period in the project. Suppose your company is considering building a facility for an upcoming Olympic
competition. The construction cost would be $350 million. The facility would be used for one year and generate
cash inflows of $950 million. Then, the following year, your company would be required to convert the facility
into a public park area for the city, which is expected to cost $620 million. Placing these cash flows in a timeline
results in the following (Table 16.8):
488 16 · How Companies Think about Investing

                                              Year  012

Cash Flow ($Millions) (350) 950 (620)

Table 16.8

The NPV profile for this project looks like Figure 16.3. The NPV is negative at low interest rates, becomes
positive at higher interest rates, and then turns negative again as the interest rate continues to rise. Because
the NPV profile line crosses the horizontal axis twice, there are two IRRs. In other words, there are two interest
rates at which NPV equals zero.

                                                   Figure 16.3 NPV Profile Graph for a Project with Two IRRs

Reinvestment Rate Assumption. The IRR assumes that the cash flows are reinvested at the internal rate of
return when they are received. This is a disadvantage of the IRR method. The firm may not be able to find any
other projects with returns equal to a high-IRR project, so the company may not be able to reinvest at the IRR.

The reinvestment rate assumption becomes problematic when a company has several acceptable projects and
is attempting to rank the projects. We will look more closely at the issues that can arise when considering
mutually exclusive projects later in this chapter. If a company is simply deciding whether to accept a single
project, the reinvestment assumption limitation is not relevant.

Overlooking Differences in Scale. Another disadvantage of using the IRR method to choose among various
acceptable projects is that it ignores differences in scale. The IRR converts the cash flows to percentages and
ignores differences in the size or scale of projects. Issues that occur when comparing projects of different
scales are covered later in this chapter.

 16.4 Alternative Methods

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Calculate profitability index.
  · Calculate discounted payback period.
  · Calculate modified internal rate of return.

Profitability Index (PI)

The profitability index (PI) uses the same inputs as the NPV calculation, but it converts the results to a ratio.
The numerator is the present value of the benefits of doing a project. The denominator is the present value of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        16.4 · Alternative Methods 489

the cost of doing the project. The formula for calculating PI is

For the embroidery machine project that Sam's Sporting Goods is considering, the PI would be calculated as

The numerator of the PI formula is the benefit of the project, and the denominator is the cost of the project.
Thus, the PI is the benefit relative to the cost. When NPV is greater than zero, PI will be greater than 1. When
NPV is less than zero, PI will be less than 1. Therefore, the decision criterion using the PI method is to accept a
project if the PI is greater than 1 and reject a project if the PI is less than 1.

Note that the NPV method and the PI method of project evaluation will always provide the same answer to the
accept-or-reject question. The advantage of using the PI method is that it is helpful in ranking projects from
best to worst. Issues that arise when ranking projects are discussed later in this chapter.

Discounted Payback Period

The payback period method provides a fast, simple approach to evaluating a project, but it suffers from the
fact that it ignores the time value of money. The discounted payback period method addresses this flaw by
discounting cash flows using the company's cost of funds and then using these discounted values to
determine the payback period.

Consider Sam's Sporting Goods' decision regarding whether to purchase an embroidery machine. The
expected cash flows and their values when discounted using the company's 9% cost of funds are shown in
Table 16.9. Earlier, we calculated the project's payback period as four years; that is how long it would take the
company to recover all of the cash that it would spend on the project. Remember, however, that the payback
period does not consider the company's cost of funds, so it underestimates the true breakeven time period.

            Year       0                1  2                      3  4  5  6

Cash Flow ($)          (16,000.00) 2,000.00 4,000.00 5,000.00 5,000.00 5,000.00 5,000.00

Discounted Cash Flow ($) (16,000) 1,834.86 3,366.72 3,860.92 3,542.13 3,249.66 2,981.34

Cumulative Discounted  (16,000.00) (14,165.14) (10,798.42) (6,937.50) (3,395.37) (145.72) 2,835.62
Cash Flow ($)

Table 16.9

When the cash flows are appropriately discounted, the project still has not broken even by the end of year 5.

The discounted payback period would be                            years. This adjusted calculation addresses the

payback period method's flaw of not considering the time value of money, but managers are still confronted
with the other disadvantages. No objective criterion for acceptance or rejection exists because of the lack of a
theoretical underpinning for what is an acceptable payback period length. The discounted payback period
ignores any cash flows after breakeven occurs; this is a serious drawback, especially when comparing mutually
exclusive projects.

Modified Internal Rate of Return (MIRR)

Financial analysts have developed an alternative evaluation technique that is similar to the IRR but modified in
an attempt to address some of the weakness of the IRR method. This modified internal rate of return
(MIRR) is calculated using the following steps:

1. Find the present value of all of the cash outflows using the firm's cost of attracting capital as the discount
490 16 · How Companies Think about Investing

     rate.
2. Find the future value of all cash inflows using the firm's cost of attracting capital as the discount rate. All

     cash inflows are compounded to the point in time at which the last cash inflow will be received. The sum of
     the future value of cash inflows is known as the project terminal value.
3. Compute the yield that sets the future value of the inflows equal to the present value of the outflows. This
     yield is the modified internal rate of return.

For our embroidery machine project, the MIRR would be calculated as shown in Table 16.10:

Year         0                                1  2  3  4       5                           6

Cash Flow ($) (16,000.00) 2,000.00 4,000.00 5,000.00 5,000.00  5,000.00 5,000.00

                                                                                           3,077.25

                                                                                           5,646.33

                                                                                           6,475.15

                                                                                           5,940.50

                                                                                           5,450.00

                                                               Terminal Value $31,595.22

Table 16.10

1. The only cash outflow is the $16,000 at time period 0.
2. The future value of each of the six expected cash inflows is calculated using the company's 9% cost of

     attracting capital. Each of the cash flows is translated to its value in time period 6, the time period of the
     final cash inflow. The sum of the future value of these six cash flows is $31,595.22. Thus, the terminal value
     is $31,595.22
3. The interest rate that equates the present value of the outflows, $16,000, to the terminal value of
     $31,595.22 six years later is found using the formula

The MIRR solves the reinvestment rate assumption problem of the IRR method because all cash flows are
compounded at the cost of capital. In addition, solving for MIRR will result in only one solution, unlike the IRR,
which may have multiple mathematical solutions. However, the MIRR method, like the IRR method, suffers
from the limitation that it does not distinguish between large-scale and small-scale projects. Because of this
limitation, the MIRR cannot be used to rank projects; it can only be used to make accept-or-reject decisions.

 16.5 Choosing between Projects

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Choose between mutually exclusive projects.
  · Compare projects with different lives.
  · Compare projects of different scales.
  · Rank projects when resources are limited.

So far, we have considered methods for deciding to accept or to reject a single stand-alone project.
Sometimes, managers must make decisions regarding which of two projects to accept, or a company might be
faced with a number of good, acceptable projects and have to decide which of those projects to take on during

Access for free at openstax.org
                      16.5 · Choosing between Projects 491

the current year.

Choosing between Mutually Exclusive Projects

Earlier in this chapter, we saw that the embroidery machine that Sam's Sporting Goods was considering had a
positive NPV, making it a project that Sam's should accept. However, another, more expensive embroidery
machine may be available that is able to make more stitches per minute. Although the initial cost of this heavy-
duty machine is higher, it would allow Sam's to embroider and sell more items each year, generating more
revenue. The two embroidery machines are mutually exclusive projects. Mutually exclusive projects compete
with one another; purchasing one embroidery machine excludes Sam's from purchasing the other embroidery
machine.

Table 16.11 shows the cash outflow and inflows expected from the original embroidery machine considered as
well as the heavy-duty machine. The heavy-duty machine costs $25,000, but it will generate more cash inflows
in years 3 through 6. Both machines have a positive NPV, leading to decisions to accept the projects. Also, both
machines have an IRR exceeding the company's 9% cost of raising capital, also leading to decisions to accept
the projects.

When considered by themselves, each of the machines is a good project for Sam's to pursue. The question the
managers face is which is the better of the two projects. When faced with this type of decision, the rule is to
take the project with the highest NPV. Remember that the goal is to choose projects that add value to the
company. Because the NPV of a project is the estimate of how much value it will create, choosing the project
with the higher NPV is choosing the project that will create the greater value.

             Year  0  1 2 3 4 5 6 NPV IRR

Regular Machine ($) (16,000) 2,000 4,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 2,835.62 14.10%

Heavy-Duty Machine ($) (25,000) 2,000 4,000 8,000 9,000 9,000 9,000 3,970.67 13.20%

Table 16.11

LINK TO LEARNING

Olympic Project Economics

The investment analysis procedures used by companies are also used by government entities when
evaluating projects. Olympic host cities receive direct revenues from broadcast rights, ticket sales, and
licensing agreements. The cities also expect indirect benefits from increased tourism, including increased
employment and higher tax revenues. These benefits come after the city makes a major investment in
infrastructure, spending money on stadiums, housing, and transportation. The investment in infrastructure
for the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, Russia, was over $50 billion.2 Why do you think the infrastructure
investment for these games was so much higher than the amount spent by cities hosting previous games?
If your city were discussing the possibility of bidding to be an Olympic host city, what would you suggest it
consider when evaluating the opportunity? Check out this article (https://openstax.org/r/this-article) for
more information.

Choosing between Projects with Different Lives

Suppose you are considering starting an ice-cream truck business. You find that you can purchase a used truck
for $50,000. You estimate that the truck will last for three years, and you will be able to sell enough ice cream

2 David Filipov. "Russia Spent $50 Billion on the Sochi Olympics. It Might Actually Have Been Worth It." Washington Post, November
15, 2017. https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/europe/that-sochi-olympic-boondoggle-russians-say-all-the-investment-is-
paying-off/2017/11/13/65014bd0-b82c-11e7-9b93-b97043e57a22_story.html
492 16 · How Companies Think about Investing

treats to generate a cash inflow of $40,000 during each of those years. Your cost of capital is 10%. The positive
NPV of $49,474 for the project makes this an acceptable project.

Another ice-cream truck is also for sale for $50,000. This truck is smaller and will not be able to hold as many
frozen treats. However, the truck is newer, with lower mileage, and you estimate that you can use it for six
years. This newer truck will allow you to generate a cash inflow of $30,000 each year for the next six years. The
NPV of the newer truck is $80,658.

Because both trucks are acceptable projects but you can only drive one truck at a time, you must choose which
truck to purchase. At first, it may be tempting to purchase the newer, lower-mileage truck because of its
higher NPV. Unfortunately, when comparing two projects that have different lives, a decision cannot be made
simply by comparing the NPVs. Although the ice-cream truck with the six-year life span has a much higher NPV
than the larger truck, it consumes your resources for a long time.

There are two methods for comparing projects with different lives. Both assume that when the short-life
project concludes, another, similar project will be available.

Replacement Chain Approach

With the replacement chain approach, as many short-life projects as necessary are strung together to equal
the life of the long-life project. You can purchase the newer, lower-mileage ice-cream truck and run your
business for six years. To make a comparison, you assume that if you purchase the larger truck that will last
for three years, you will be able to repeat the same project, purchasing another larger truck that will last for
the next three years. In essence, you are comparing a six-year project with two consecutive three-year projects
so that both options will generate cash inflows for six years. Your timeline for the projects (comparing an
older, larger truck with a newer, lower-mileage truck) will look like Table 16.12:

      Year                                    0     1     2  3         4     5     6

Older Truck ($) ($50,000) 40,000 40,000 40,000 40,000 40,000 40,000

Older Truck ($)                                              (50,000)

Newer Truck ($) (50,000) 30,000 30,000 30,000 30,000 30,000 30,000

Table 16.12

The present values of all of the cash inflows and outflows from purchasing two of the older, larger trucks
consecutively are added together to find the NPV of that alternative. The NPV of this alternative is $86,645,
which is higher than the NPV of $80,658 of the newer truck, as shown in Table 16.13:

Year                        0                    1     2     3            4     5     6

Older Truck ($)                                  40,000 40,000 40,000 40,000 40,000 40,000

Older Truck ($)                                              (50,000)

Net Present Value (50,000) 36,363.64 33,057.85 (7,513.15) 27,320.54 24,836.85 22,578.96

                 Table 16.13

When using the replacement chain approach, the short-term project is repeated any number of times to equal
the length of the longer-term project. If one project is 5 years and another is 20 years, the short one is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                           16.5 · Choosing between Projects 493

repeated four times. This method can become tedious when the length of the longer project is not a multiple
of the shorter project. For example, when choosing between a five-year project and a seven-year project, the
short one would have to be duplicated seven times and the long project would have to be repeated five times
to get to a common length of 35 years for the two projects.

Equal Annuity Approach

The equal annuity approach assumes that both the short-term and the long-term projects can be repeated
forever. This approach involves the following steps:

Step 1: Find the NPV of each of the projects.

  · The NPV of the larger, older ice-cream truck is $49,474.
  · The NPV of the smaller, newer ice-cream truck is $80,658.

Step 2: Find the annuity that has the same present value as the NPV and the same number of periods as the
project.

  · For the larger, older ice-cream truck, we want to find the three-year annuity that would have a present
      value of $49,474 when using a 10% discount rate. This is $19,894.

  · For the smaller, newer ice-cream truck, we want to find the six-year annuity that would have a present
      value of $80,658 when using a 10% discount rate. This is $18,520.

Step 3: Assume that these projects, or similar projects, can be repeated over and over and that these annuities
will continue forever. Calculate the present value of these annuities continuing forever using the perpetuity
formula.

We again find that the older, larger truck is preferred to the newer, smaller truck.

These methods correct for unequal lives, but managers need to be aware that some unavoidable issues come
up when these adjustments are made. Both the replacement chain and equal annuity approaches assume that
projects can be replicated with identical projects in the future. It is important to note that this is not always a
reasonable assumption; these replacement projects may not exist. Estimating cash flows from potential
projects is prone to errors, as we will discuss in Financial Forecasting these errors are compounded and
become more significant as projects are expected to be repeated. Inflation and changing market conditions
are likely to result in cash flows varying in the future from our predictions, and as we go further into the
future, these changes are potentially greater.

Choosing Projects When Resources Are Limited

Choosing positive NPV projects adds value to a company. Although we often assume that the company will
choose to pursue all positive NPV projects, in reality, managers often face a budget that restricts the amount
of capital that they may invest in a given time period. Thus, managers are forced to choose among several
positive NPV projects. The goal is to maximize the total NPV of the firm's projects while remaining within
budget constraints.

 LINK TO LEARNING

 Profitability Index

  Managers should reject any project with a negative NPV. When managers find themselves with an array of
  projects with a positive NPV, the profitability index can be used to choose among those projects. To learn
494 16 · How Companies Think about Investing

more, watch this video about how a company might use the profitability index (https://openstax.org/r/
might-use).

For example, suppose Southwest Manufacturing is considering the seven projects displayed in Table 16.14.
Each of the projects has a positive NPV and would add value to the company. The firm has a budget of $200
million to put toward new projects in the upcoming year. Doing all seven of the projects would require initial
investments totaling $430 million. Thus, although all of the projects are good projects, Southwest
Manufacturing cannot fund them all in the upcoming year and must choose among these projects. Southwest
Manufacturing could choose the combination of Projects A and D; the combination of Projects B, C, and E; or
several other combinations of projects and exhaust its $200 million investment budget.

Project      NPV                 Initial Investment  Profitability  Cumulative Investment Required
         ($Millions)                  ($Millions)        Index                       ($Millions)
    A                                       150            1.40                           150
    B          60                           100            1.25                           250
    C          25                            70            1.14                           320
    D          10                            50            1.30                           370
    E          15                            30            1.37                           400
    F          11                            20            1.35                           420
    G           7                            10            1.20                           430
                2

Table 16.14 Projects Being Considered by Southwest Manufacturing

To decide which combination results in the largest added NPV for the company, rank the projects based on
their profitability index, as is done in Table 16.15. Projects A, E, and F should be chosen, as they have the
highest profitability indexes. Because those three projects require a cumulative investment of $200 million,
none of the remaining projects can be undertaken at the present time. Doing those three projects will add $78
million in NPV to the firm. Out of this set of choices, there is no combination of projects that is affordable given
Southwest Manufacturing's budget that would add more than $78 million in NPV.

Project      NPV                 Initial Investment  Profitability  Cumulative Investment Required
         ($Millions)                  ($Millions)        Index                       ($Millions)
    A                                       150            1.40                           150
    E          60                            30            1.37                           180
    F          11                            20            1.35                           200
    D           7                            50            1.30                           250
    B          15                           100            1.25                           350
    G          25                            10            1.20                           360
    C           2                            70            1.14                           430
               10

Table 16.15 Projects Ranked by Profitability Index

Notice that when choices must be made among projects, the decision cannot be made by simply ranking the
projects from highest to lowest NPV. Project D has an NPV of $15 million, which is higher than both the $11
million of Project E and the $7 million of Project F. However, Project D requires $50 million for an initial

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                           16.5 · Choosing between Projects 495

investment. For the same $50 million of investment funds, Southwest Manufacturer can accept both Projects E
and F for a total NPV of $18 million. Investment capital is a scare resource for this company. By ranking
projects based on their profitability index, the company is able to determine the best way to allocate its scarce
capital for the largest potential increase in NPV.

 CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

 Capital Budgeting Challenges

  Although the basic techniques of project evaluation are straightforward, real-world capital budgeting
  decisions are complex and multifaceted. The goal of capital budgeting is to choose the projects that will
  bring the most value to the shareholders of the company. The NPV rule provides a clear, concise criterion
  for which projects will bring value to the shareholders. It is important to remember, however, that all of the
  project valuation calculations are based on projected cash flows. These projected cash flows are estimates,
  based on the best educated guesses that a company makes about its business opportunities over the next
  few years. Because no company has a crystal ball that can predict the future, its calculation of NPV is an
  estimate of what it expects.

  Think, for example, of an oil company deciding whether to drill for oil. The project will require expenditures
  on equipment, land, and other items. The cash inflows will depend on the likelihood of oil being found, the
  quantity of oil produced by the well, and the price at which the oil can be sold. If a company estimates that
  oil will sell for $100 per barrel during the next few years, the project will have a much higher NPV than if the
  company estimates that oil will sell for only $50 per barrel.

  A project that has a positive NPV and is accepted when a company is planning how to allocate its capital
  toward investments may end up being a bad project that the company wishes it had avoided if the future is
  much different from what it projected. Managers must stay attuned to economic developments and
  reevaluate capital budgeting decisions when significant changes occur. In spring 2020, managers around
  the globe were faced with a dramatically changing economic environment amid a pandemic. Oil companies,
  for example, saw oil prices drop from over $50 per barrel at the beginning of March to under $15 per barrel
  by the end of April.

 LINK TO LEARNING

 Reducing Capital Spending

  In June 2020, McKinsey & Company looked at major companies around the world that were reducing their
  capital expenditures in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic. These companies were cutting their capital
  budgets by 10% to 80% from their originally planned levels for 2020. Reductions were especially large in the
  oil and gas industry, as companies found their revenue projections, and thus the NPV of their planned
  projects, falling dramatically. In addition, companies found themselves needing to free up cash; with more
  limited cash resources, fewer positive NPV projects could be accepted and funded.3 Due to the COVID-19
  pandemic, many CFOs were challenged to stabilize their corporate cash flows. This article explains how
  quickly reducing capital spending (https://openstax.org/r/quickly-reducing), which is usually a quick
  enough fix, was able to help.

3 Tom Brinded, Zak Cutler, Erikhans Kok, and Prakash Parbhoo. "Resetting Capital Spending in the Wake of COVID-19." McKinsey &
Company. June 25, 2020. https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/operations/our-insights/resetting-capital-spending-in-the-
wake-of-covid-19
496 16 · How Companies Think about Investing

      16.6 Using Excel to Make Company Investment Decisions

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Calculate NPV using Excel.
         · Calculate IRR using Excel.
         · Create an NPV profile using Excel.

       A Microsoft Excel spreadsheet provides an alternative to using a financial calculator to automate the arithmetic
       necessary to calculate NPV and IRR. An advantage of using Excel is that you can quickly change any
       assumptions or numbers in your problem and recalculate NPV or IRR based on that updated information.
       Excel is a versatile tool with more than one way to set up most problems. We will consider a couple of
       straightforward examples of using Excel to calculate NPV and IRR.
       Suppose your company is considering a project that will cost $30,000 this year. The cash inflow from this
       project is expected to be $6,000 next year and $8,000 the following year. The cash inflow is expected to
       increase by $2,000 yearly, resulting in a cash inflow of $18,000 in year 7, the final year of the project. You know
       that your company's cost of funds is 9%. Your company would like to evaluate this project.

      Calculating NPV Using Excel

       To calculate NPV using Excel, you would begin by placing each year's expected cash flows in a sheet, as in row
       5 in Figure 16.4. One approach to calculating NPV is to use the formula for discounting future cash flows, as is
       shown in row 6.

                                             Figure 16.4 Inserting Present Cash Flows Using Excel ($ except Cost of Funds)

       Figure 16.5 shows the present value of each year's cash flow resulting from the formula. The NPV is then
       calculated by summing the present values of the cash flows.

                Download the spreadsheet file (https://openstax.org/r/spreadsheet-file) containing key Chapter 16
                Excel exhibits.

                                Figure 16.5 NPV Calculated by Summing Present Values of Cash Flows ($ except Cost of Funds)

       Alternatively, Excel is programmed with financial functions, including a calculation for NPV. The NPV formula is
       shown in cell J7 in Figure 16.6 below. However, it is important to pay attention to how Excel defines NPV. The
       Excel NPV function calculates the sum of the present values of the cash flows occurring from period 1 through
       the end of the project using the designated discount rate, but it fails to include the initial investment at time

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     16.6 · Using Excel to Make Company Investment Decisions 497

period zero at the beginning of the project. The NPV function in cell J6 will return $56,947 for this project. You
must subtract the initial cash outflow of $30,000 that occurs at time 0 to get the NPV of $26,947 for the project.
When entering the Excel-programmed NPV function, you must remember to include references only to the
cells that contain cash flows from year 1 to the end of the project. Then, subtract the initial investment of year
0 to calculate NPV according to the standard definition of NPV--the present values of the cash inflows minus
the present value of the cash outflow. Note: Because of the nonstandard use of the term NPV by Excel, many
users prefer to use the method described above rather than this predefined function.

                                                     Figure 16.6 NPV Formula ($ except IRR/Cost of Funds)

Calculating IRR Using Excel

Excel also provide a function for calculating IRR. This function is shown in Figure 16.7, cell J8. The IRR function
properly uses all the project's cash flows, including the initial cash outflow at time 0, in its calculation, unlike
the NPV function. This function will correctly return the IRR of 27.7% for the project. Figure 16.8 shows the
completed spreadsheet.

                                          Figure 16.7 Function for Calculating IRR ($ except IRR/Cost of Funds)

                                                  Figure 16.8 Final Spreadsheet ($ except IRR/Cost of Funds)

Using Excel to Create an NPV Profile

Firms often do not know exactly what their cost of attracting capital is, so they must use estimates in their
decision-making. Also, the cost of attracting capital can change with economic and market conditions.
Especially if markets are volatile, a company may use an NPV profile to see how sensitive their decisions are to
changes in financing costs. Excel simplifies the creation of an NPV profile.
Middleton Manufacturing is considering installing solar panels to heat water and provide lighting throughout
its plant. To do so will cost the company $800,000 this year. However, this upgrade will save the company an
estimated $150,000 in electrical costs each year for the next 10 years. Constructing an NPV profile of this
project will allow Middleton to see how the NPV of the project changes with the cost of attracting funds.
498 16 · How Companies Think about Investing

       First, the project cash flows must be placed in an Excel spreadsheet, as is shown in cells D2 through N2 in
       Figure 16.9. The company's cost of funds is placed in cell B1; begin by putting in 10% for this rate. Next, the
       formula for NPV is placed in cell B6; cell B6 shows the NPV of the cash flows in cells D2 through N2, using the
       rate that is in cell B1.
       For reference, compute IRR in cell B4. Calculating IRR is not necessary for creating the NPV profile. However, it
       gives a good reference point. Remember that if the IRR of a project is greater than the firm's cost of attracting
       capital, then the NPV will be positive; if the IRR of a project is less than the firm's cost of attracting capital, then
       the NPV will be negative.
       An NPV profile is created by calculating the NPV of the project for a variety of possible costs of attracting
       capital. In other words, you want to calculate NPV using the project cash flows in cells D2 through N2, using a
       variety of discount rates in cell B1. This is accomplished by using the Excel data table function. The data table
       function shows how the outcome of an Excel formula changes when one of the cells in the spreadsheet
       changes. In this instance, you want to determine how the value of the NPV formula (cell B6) changes when the
       discount rate (cell B1) changes.

                                                                 Figure 16.9 Project Cash Flows Inserted into Excel

       To do this, enter the range of interest rates that you want to consider down a column, beginning in cell A7.
       This example shows rates from 1% to 20% entered in cells A7 through A26. Your Excel file should now look like
       the screenshot in Figure 16.9.
       Next, highlight the cells containing the NPV calculation and the range of discount rates. Thus, you will highlight
       cells A6 through A26 and B6 through B26 (see Figure 16.10). Click Data at the top of the Excel menu so that you
       see the What-If Analysis feature. Choose Data Table. Because the various discount rates you want to use are in
       a column, use the "Column input cell" option. Enter "B1" in this box. You are telling Excel to calculate NPV
       using each of the numbers in this column as the cost of attracting funds in cell B1. Click OK.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     16.6 · Using Excel to Make Company Investment Decisions 499

                                                              Figure 16.10 Creating a Data Table in Excel

After clicking OK, the cells in column B next to the list of various discount rates will fill with the NPVs
corresponding to each of the rates. This is shown in Figure 16.11.

                                                    Figure 16.11 NPV Calculated for Various Discount Rates

Now that the various NPVs are calculated, you can create the NPV profile graph. To create the graph, begin by
highlighting the discount rates and NPVs that are in cells A7 through A26 and B7 through B26. Next, go to the
Insert tab in the menu at the top of Excel. Several different chart options will be available; choose Scatter. You
will end up with a chart that looks like the one in Figure 16.12. You can customize the chart by renaming it,
labeling the axes, and making other cosmetic changes if you like.
You will notice that the NPV profile crosses the x-axis between 13% and 14%; remember that the NPV will be
zero when the discount rate that is used to calculate the NPV is equal to the project's IRR, which we previously
calculated to be 13.43%. If the firm's cost of raising funds is lower than 13.43%, the NPV profile shows that the
project has a positive NPV, and the project should be accepted. Conversely, if the firm's cost of raising funds is
greater than 13.43%, the NPV of this project will be negative, and the project should not be accepted.
500 16 · How Companies Think about Investing

                                                                     Figure 16.12 NPV Profile Created Using Excel

       Middleton Manufacturing can use this NPV profile to evaluate its solar panel installation project. If the
       managers think that the cost of attracting funds for the company is 10%, then the project has a positive NPV of
       $121,685 and the company should install the panels. The NPV profile shows that if the managers are
       underestimating the cost of funds even by 30% and it will really cost Middleton 13% to attract funds, the
       project is still a good project. The cost of attracting funds would have to be higher than 13.43% for the solar
       panel project to be rejected.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                               16 · Summary 501

     Summary

16.1 Payback Period Method

The payback period is the simplest project evaluation method. It is the time it takes the company to recoup its
initial investment. Its usefulness is limited, however, because it ignores the time value of money.

16.2 Net Present Value (NPV) Method

Net present value (NPV) is calculated by subtracting the present value of a project's cash outflows from the
present value of the project's cash inflows. A project should be accepted if its NPV is positive and rejected if its
NPV is negative.

16.3 Internal Rate of Return (IRR) Method

The internal rate of return (IRR) of a project is the discount rate that sets the present value of a project's cash
inflows exactly equal to the present value of the project's cash outflows. A project should be accepted if its IRR
is greater than the firm's cost of attracting capital.

16.4 Alternative Methods

The discounted payback period uses the time value of money to discount future cash flows to see how long it
will be before the initial investment of a project is recovered. MIRR provides a variation on IRR in which all cash
flows are compounded using the cost of capital, resolving the reinvestment rate assumption problem of the
IRR method; unlike IRR, which may have multiple mathematical solutions, MIRR will result in one solution. The
profitability index is calculated as the NPV of the project divided by the initial cost of the project.

16.5 Choosing between Projects

Firms may need to choose among a variety of good projects. The projects may have different lives or be
differently sized projects that require different amounts of resources. By choosing projects with the highest
profitability index, companies can take on the projects that will lead to the greatest increase in value for the
company.

16.6 Using Excel to Make Company Investment Decisions

Excel spreadsheets provide a way to easily calculate the NPV and IRR of a project. Using Excel to create an NPV
profile allows a company to see how much its estimates of the cost of raising funds can err from the true cost
and have the project still be an acceptable project.

     Key Terms

capital budgeting the process a business follows to evaluate potential major projects or investments
discounted payback period the length of time it will take for the present value of the future cash inflows of

    a project to equal the initial cost of the investment
equal annuity approach a method of comparing projects of different lives by assuming that the projects can

    be repeated forever
internal rate of return (IRR) the discount rate that sets the NPV of a project equal to zero
modified internal rate of return (MIRR) the yield that sets the future value of the cash inflows of a project

    equal to the present value of the cash outflows of the project
mutually exclusive projects projects that compete against each other so that when one project is chosen,

    the other project cannot be done
net present value (NPV) the present value of the cash inflows of a project minus the present value of the

    cash outflows of the project
payback period the length of time it will take for a company to make enough money from an investment to

    recover the initial cost of the investment
502 16 · CFA Institute

profitability index (PI) the present value of cash inflows divided by the present value of cash outflows
replacement chain approach a method of comparing projects of differing lives by repeating shorter

    projects multiple times until they reach the lifetime of the longest project

     CFA Institute

This chapter supports some of the Learning Outcome Statements (LOS) in this CFA® Level I Study Session
(https://openstax.org/r/cfa-level-i-study-session). Reference with permission of CFA Institute.

     Multiple Choice

 1. Which of the following is a disadvantage of using the payback method?
      a. It only considers cash flows that occur after the project breaks even.
      b. It ignores the time value of money.
       c. It is difficult to calculate.
      d. You must know the company's cost of raising funds to be able to use it.

 2. A company should accept a project if ________.
      a. the NPV of the project is positive
      b. the NPV of the project is negative
       c. the IRR of the project is positive
      d. the IRR of the project is negative

 3. The net present value of a project equals ________.
      a. the future value of the cash inflows minus the future value of the cash outflows
      b. the present value of the cash inflows minus the future value of the cash outflows
       c. the present value of the cash inflows minus the present value of the cash outflows
      d. the future value of the cash inflows minus the present value of the cash outflows

 4. The IRR of a project is the discount rate that ________.
      a. makes the NPV equal to zero
      b. equates the present value of the cash inflows to the future value of the cash outflows
       c. makes the NPV positive
      d. equates the present value of cash outflows to the future value of the cash inflows

 5. The IRR method assumes that ________.
      a. cash flows are reinvested at the firm's cost of attracting funds when they are received
      b. cash flows of a project are never reinvested
       c. cash flows are reinvested at the internal rate of return when they are received
      d. the NPV of a project is negative

 6. When cash outflows occur during more than one time period, ________.
      a. the project's NPV will definitely be negative
      b. the project can have multiple IRRs
       c. the project should not be done
      d. the time value of money is not important

 7. The discounted payback period method ________.
      a. is used to compare two projects that have different lives
      b. fails to consider the time value of money

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                   16 · Review Questions 503

       c. provides an objective criterion for an accept-or-reject decision grounded in financial theory
      d. discounts cash flows using the company's cost of funds to overcome a flaw of the payback period

           method

 8. Which of the following is a method of adjustment for comparing projects of different lives?
      a. IRR
      b. Modified IRR
       c. Payback period
      d. Equal annuity

 9. When a company can only fund some of its good projects, it should rank the projects by ________.
      a. PI
      b. IRR
       c. NPV
      d. payback period

10. If a company is considering two mutually exclusive projects, which of the following statements is true?
       a. The company must do both projects if it chooses to do one of the projects.
      b. The IRR method should be used to compare the projects.
       c. Doing one of the projects means the other project cannot be done.
      d. The company does not need to compare the projects because it can choose to do both.

     Review Questions

 1. Describe the disadvantages of using the payback period to evaluate a project.

 2. Explain why a company would want to accept a project with a positive NPV and reject a project with a
     negative NPV.

 3. Westland Manufacturing could spend $5,000 to update its existing fluorescent lighting fixtures to newer
     fluorescent fixtures that would be more energy efficient. Explain why updating the light fixtures with
     newer fluorescent fixtures and replacing the existing fixtures with LED fixtures would be considered
     mutually exclusive projects.

 4. When faced with a decision between two good but mutually exclusive projects, should a manager base the
     decision on NPV or IRR? Why?

     Problems

 1. Westland Manufacturing spends $20,000 to update the lighting in its factory to more energy-efficient LED
     fixtures. This will save the company $4,000 per year in electricity costs. What is the payback period of this
     project?

 2. Westland Manufacturing spends $20,000 to update the lighting in its factory to more energy-efficient LED
     fixtures. This will save the company $4,000 per year in electricity costs. The company estimates that these
     fixtures will last for 10 years. If the company's cost of funds is 8%, what is the NPV of this project?

 3. If Westland Manufacturing finds that its cost of funds is 11%, what will happen to the NPV of the project in
     problem 2?

 4. Westland Manufacturing spends $20,000 to update the lighting in its factory to more energy-efficient LED
     fixtures. This will save the company $4,000 per year in electricity costs. The company estimates that these
     fixtures will last for 10 years. What is the IRR of this project?
504 16 · Video Activity

 5. Westland Manufacturing spends $20,000 to update the lighting in its factory to more energy-efficient LED
     fixtures. This will save the company $4,000 per year in electricity costs. The company estimates that these
     fixtures will last for 10 years. If the company's cost of funds is 8%, what is the PI of this project?

 6. Westland Manufacturing spends $20,000 to update the lighting in its factory to more energy-efficient LED
     fixtures. This will save the company $4,000 per year in electricity costs. The company estimates that these
     fixtures will last for 10 years. If the company's cost of funds is 8%, what is the modified IRR of this project?

 7. Westland Manufacturing spends $20,000 to update the lighting in its factory to more energy-efficient LED
     fixtures. This will save the company $4,000 per year in electricity costs. The company estimates that these
     fixtures will last for 10 years. If the company's cost of funds is 8%, what is the discounted payback period
     of this project?

 8. Holiday Hotels is considering two different floorings to use in its buildings. The less expensive tile will need
     to be replaced every five years. The more durable, more expensive tile will need to be replaced every eight
     years. To use the replacement chain approach to compare these two projects, how many times would you
     have to assume each type of tile would be replaced?

 9. You will be living in your college town for two more years. You are considering purchasing a townhouse
     that will cost you $250,000 today. You estimate that if you do, your expenses for each of the next two years
     will be $6,000 less than if you rented an apartment. You think that you would be able to lease the
     townhouse to another college student afterward for $12,000 per year and that your taxes, maintenance,
     and other expenses for the townhouse would be $5,000 per year. You expect to lease the townhouse for
     five years before you sell it, and you expect to be able to sell the townhouse for $275,000. Use Excel to
     create an NPV profile for this undertaking. If it will cost you 3% to borrow money, should you buy the
     townhouse? What if it will cost you 8% to borrow money?

     Video Activity

Calculating NPV and IRR

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/CFA-Level-I)
Businesses use NPV and IRR to determine whether or not a project will add value for shareholders. Watch this
CFA® Level I Corporate Finance video to learn more. Working along with the video, you will gain practice in
using your financial calculator to calculate IRR.

 1. According to the video, how should a company use NPV and IRR to decide whether a project should be
     undertaken?

 2. In the video, Trim Corp. is considering a project that is expected to have cash inflows of $350, $250, and
     $150 in years 1, 2, and 3, respectively. What do you think would happen to the NPV of the project if the
     company expected the same cash flows, but in reverse order? In other words, what do you think would
     happen to the NPV if the $150 were the cash inflow of year 1, $250 were the cash inflow for year 2, and
     $350 were the cash inflow for year 3? Using the same discount rate as in the video, 25%, calculate the NPV
     for the project with this string of cash outflows. Was the outcome what you thought it would be?

The Tokyo Olympics

Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/tokyo-olympics)
The capital investment a city must undertake to host the Olympic Games is massive. Learn more about the
capital investments and expenses Tokyo faced as host of the 2020 Summer Olympics and how it was impacted
by a global pandemic by watching this video, How the Tokyo Olympics Became the Most Expensive Summer
Games Ever.

 3. Given the costs discussed in the video, create an Excel spreadsheet to estimate the NPV and IRR of hosting

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                       16 · Video Activity 505

    the Olympic Games for a city.
4. How would the numbers in your Excel spreadsheet change because of the COVID-19 pandemic? Create an

    NPV profile for Tokyo's Olympic Games given the changes that were caused by the pandemic.
506 16 · Video Activity
Access for free at openstax.org
17 · Why It Matters                                                                                                              507

17
              How Firms Raise Capital

Figure 17.1 A company can only attract capital if it offers an expected return that is competitive with other options. (credit:
modification of "1166357_33949449" by Jenifer Corrêa/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline

  17.1 The Concept of Capital Structure
  17.2 The Costs of Debt and Equity Capital
  17.3 Calculating the Weighted Average Cost of Capital
  17.4 Capital Structure Choices
  17.5 Optimal Capital Structure
  17.6 Alternative Sources of Funds

      Why It Matters

The most important job that company managers have is to maximize the value of the company. Some obvious
things come to mind when you think of how managers would do this. For example, to maximize the value of
American Airlines, the managers need to attract customers and sell seats on flights. They also need to keep
costs as low as possible, which means keeping the costs of purchasing fuel and making plane repairs as low as
possible. While the concept of keeping costs low is simple, the specific decisions a firm makes can be complex.
If American Airlines wants to purchase a new airplane, it needs to consider not just the dollar cost of the initial
purchase but also the passenger and cargo capacity of the plane as well as ongoing maintenance costs.

In addition to paying salaries to its pilots and flight attendants, American Airlines must pay to use investors'
money. If the company wants to purchase a new airplane, it may borrow money to pay for the plane. Even if
American Airlines does not need to incur debt to buy the plane, the money it uses to buy the plane ultimately
belongs to the owners or shareholders of the company. The company must consider the opportunity cost of
this money and the return that shareholders are expecting on their investments.

Just as different planes have distinctive characteristics and costs, the different types of financing that American
Airlines can use will have different characteristics and costs. One of the tasks of the financial manager is to
consider the trade-offs of these sources of funding. In this chapter, we look at the basic principles that
managers use to minimize the cost of funding and maximize the value of the firm.
508 17 · How Firms Raise Capital

17.1 The Concept of Capital Structure

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Distinguish between the two major sources of capital appearing on a balance sheet.
  · Explain why there is a cost of capital.
  · Calculate the weights in a company's capital structure.

The Basic Balance Sheet

In order to produce and sell its products or services, a company needs assets. If a firm will produce shirts, for
example, it will need equipment such as sewing machines, cutting boards, irons, and a building in which to
store its equipment. The company will also need some raw materials such as fabric, buttons, and thread. These
items the company needs to conduct its operations are assets. They appear on the left-hand side of the
balance sheet.

The company has to pay for these assets. The sources of the money the company uses to pay for these assets
appear on the right-hand side of the balance sheet. The company's sources of financing represent its capital.
There are two broad types of capital: debt (or borrowing) and equity (or ownership).

Figure 17.2 is a representation of a basic balance sheet. Remember that the two sides of the balance sheet

must be                           . Companies typically finance their assets through equity (selling

ownership shares to stockholders) and debt (borrowing money from lenders). The debt that a firm uses is

often referred to as financial leverage. The relative proportions of debt and equity that a firm uses in

financing its assets is referred to as its capital structure.

        Figure 17.2 Basic Balance Sheet for Company with Debt, Preferred Stock, and Common Equity in Capital Structure

Attracting Capital

When a company raises money from investors, those investors forgo the opportunity to invest that money
elsewhere. In economics terms, there is an opportunity cost to those who buy a company's bonds or stock.

Suppose, for example, that you have $5,000, and you purchase Tesla stock. You could have purchased Apple
stock or Disney stock instead. There were many other options, but once you chose Tesla stock, you no longer
had the money available for the other options. You would only purchase Tesla stock if you thought that you
would receive a return as large as you would have for the same level of risk on the other investments.

From Tesla's perspective, this means that the company can only attract your capital if it offers an expected
return high enough for you to choose it as the company that will use your money. Providing a return equal to
what potential investors could expect to earn elsewhere for a similar risk is the cost a company bears in
exchange for obtaining funds from investors. Just as a firm must consider the costs of electricity, raw
materials, and wages when it calculates the costs of doing business, it must also consider the cost of attracting
capital so that it can purchase its assets.

Weights in the Capital Structure

Most companies have multiple sources of capital. The firm's overall cost of capital is a weighted average of its

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                             17.2 · The Costs of Debt and Equity Capital 509

debt and equity costs of capital. The average of a firm's debt and equity costs of capital, weighted by the
fractions of the firm's value that correspond to debt and equity, is known as the weighted average cost of
capital (WACC).

The weights in the WACC are the proportions of debt and equity used in the firm's capital structure. If, for
example, a company is financed 25% by debt and 75% by equity, the weights in the WACC would be 25% on the
debt cost of capital and 75% on the equity cost of capital. The balance sheet of the company would look like
Figure 17.3.

These weights can be derived from the right-hand side of a market-value-based balance sheet. Recall that
accounting-based book values listed on traditional financial statements reflect historical costs. The market-
value balance sheet is similar to the accounting balance sheet, but all values are current market values.

                           Figure 17.3 Balance Sheet of Company with Capital Structure of 25% Debt and 75% Equity

Just as the accounting balance sheet must balance, the market-value balance sheet must balance:

This equation reminds us that the values of a company's debt and equity flow from the market value of the
company's assets.

Let's look at an example of how a company would calculate the weights in its capital structure. Bluebonnet
Industries has debt with a book (face) value of $5 million and equity with a book value of $3 million.
Bluebonnet's debt is trading at 97% of its face value. It has one million shares of stock, which are trading for
$15 per share.

First, the market values of the company's debt and equity must be determined. Bluebonnet's debt is trading at

a discount; its market value is            . The market value of Bluebonnet's equity

equals                                     . Thus, the total market

value of the company's capital is          . The weight of debt in

Bluebonnet's capital structure is  . The weight of equity in its capital structure is

        .

17.2 The Costs of Debt and Equity Capital

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Calculate the after-tax cost of debt capital.
  · Explain why the return to debt holders is not the same as the cost to the firm.
  · Calculate the cost of equity capital.

The costs of debt and equity capital are what company lenders (those who allow the firm to use their capital)
expect in return for providing that capital. Just as current market values of debt and equity should be used in
determining their weights in the capital structure, current market values of debt and equity should be used in
determining the costs of those types of financing.
510 17 · How Firms Raise Capital

Cost of Debt Capital

A company's cost of debt is the interest rate it would have to pay to refinance its existing debt. Because a
firm's existing debt trades in the marketplace, its price changes according to market conditions. The overall
credit environment can change due to changing macroeconomic conditions, causing a change in the price of
debt securities. In addition, as there are changes in the overall riskiness of the firm and its ability to repay its
creditors, the price of the debt securities issued by the firm will change.

The market price of a company's existing bonds implies a yield to maturity. Recall that the yield to maturity is
the return that current purchasers of the debt will earn if they hold the bond to maturity and receive all of the
payments promised by the borrowing firm.

Yield to Maturity and the Cost of Debt

Bluebonnet's debt is selling for 97% of its face value. This means that for every $100 of face value, investors
are currently paying $97 for an outstanding bond issued by Bluebonnet Industries. This debt has a coupon
rate of 6%, paid semiannually, and the bonds mature in 15 years.

Because the bonds are selling at a discount, the yield that investors who purchase these bonds will receive if
they hold the bond to maturity exceeds 6%. The purchasers of these bonds will receive a coupon payment of

                           every six months for the next 15 years. They will also receive the $100 face value when the

bonds mature in 15 years. To calculate the yield to maturity of these bonds using your financial calculator,
input the information shown in Table 17.1.

Step                              Description               Enter  Display

                        1 Enter number of coupon payments   30 N N = 30.00

                        2 Enter the price paid for the bond 97 +/- PV PV = -97.00

                        3 Enter the coupon payment          3 PMT PMT = 3.00

                        4 Enter the face value of the bond  100 FV FV = 100.00

                        5 Compute the semiannual rate       CPT I/Y I/Y = 3.156

                        6 Multiply 3.156 by 2 to get YTM                                6.312

Table 17.1 Calculator Steps for Finding the Yield to Maturity1

The yield to maturity (YTM) of Bluebonnet Industries bonds is 6.312%. This YTM should be used in estimating
the firm's overall cost of capital, not the coupon rate of 6% that is stated on the outstanding bonds. The
coupon rate on the existing bonds is a historical rate, set under economic conditions that may have been
different from the current market conditions. The YTM of 6.312% represents what investors are currently
requiring to purchase the debt issued by the company.

After-Tax Cost of Debt

Although current debt holders demand to earn 6.312% to encourage them to lend to Bluebonnet Industries,
the cost to the firm is less than 6.312%. This is because interest paid on debt is a tax-deductible expense. When
a firm borrows money, the interest it pays is offset to some extent by the tax savings that occur because of this
deductible expense.

The after-tax cost of debt is the net cost of interest on a company's debt after taxes. This after-tax cost of

debt is the firm's effective cost of debt. The after-tax cost of debt is calculated as         , where is the

before-tax cost of debt, or the return that the lenders receive, and T is the company's tax rate. If Bluebonnet

1 The specific financial calculator in these examples is the Texas Instruments BA II PlusTM Professional model, but you can use other
financial calculators for these types of calculations.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             17.2 · The Costs of Debt and Equity Capital 511

Industries has a tax rate of 21%, then the firm's after-tax cost of debt is

This means that for every $1,000 Bluebonnet borrows, the company will have to pay its lenders

                       in interest every year. The company can deduct $63.12 from its income, so this

interest payment reduces the taxes the company must pay to the government by                                 .

Thus, Bluebonnet's effective cost of debt is                                 , or             .

THINK IT THROUGH

Calculating the After-Tax Cost of Debt

Royer Roasters has issued bonds that will mature in 18 years. The bonds have a coupon rate of 8%, and
coupon payments are made semiannually. These bonds are currently selling at a price of $102.20 per $100
face value. Royer's tax rate is 28%. What is Royer's after-tax cost of debt?

Solution:

The purchasers of these bonds will receive a coupon payment of                         every six months for

the next 18 years. The owners of the bonds will also receive the $100 face value when the bonds mature in

18 years. To calculate the yield to maturity of these bonds, input the information in Table 17.2 in your

financial calculator.

           Step        Description                         Enter                   Display

                       1 Enter number of coupon payments                     36 N N =  36.00

                       2 Enter the price paid for the bond 102.20 +/- PV PV = -102.20

                       3 Enter the coupon payment               4 PMT PMT = 4.00

                       4 Enter the face value of the bond       100 FV FV = 100.00

                       5 Compute the semiannual rate            CPT I/Y I/Y = 3.885

                       6 Multiply 3.885 by 2 to get YTM                                7.771

           Table 17.2 Calculator Steps to Find Bond Yield to Maturity

The bondholders require 7.771% to entice them to purchase the debt issued by the company. Royer
Roasters is able to deduct interest expenses before taxes. Thus, its after-tax cost of debt is

Cost of Equity Capital

Companies can raise money by selling stock, or ownership shares, of the company. Stock is known as equity
capital. The cost of common stock capital cannot be directly observed in the market; it must be estimated. Two
primary methods for estimating the cost of common stock capital are the capital asset pricing model (CAPM)
and the constant dividend growth model.
CAPM
The CAPM is based on using the firm's systematic risk to estimate the expected returns that shareholders
require to invest in the stock. According to the CAPM, the cost of equity (re) can be estimated using the
formula

For example, suppose that Bluebonnet Industries has an equity beta of 1.3. Because the beta is greater than
512 17 · How Firms Raise Capital

one, the stock has more systematic risk than the average stock in the market. Assume that the rate on 10-year

US Treasury notes is 3% and serves as a proxy for the risk-free rate. If the long-run average return for the

stock market is 11%, the market risk premium is  this means that people who invest in the

stock market are rewarded for the risk they are taking by being paid 8% more than they would have been paid

if they had purchased US Treasury notes. Bluebonnet Industries cost of equity capital can be estimated as

Constant Dividend Growth Model

The constant dividend growth model provides an alternative method of calculating a company's cost of equity.
The basic formula for the constant dividend growth model is

Thus, three things are needed to complete this calculation: the current stock price, what the dividend will be in
one year, and the growth rate of the dividend. The current price of the stock is easy to obtain by looking at the
financial news. The other two items, the dividend next year and the growth rate of the dividend, will occur in
the future and at the current time are not known with certainty; these two items must be estimated.

Suppose Bluebonnet paid a dividend of $1.50 per share to its shareholders last year. Also suppose that this
dividend has been growing at a rate of 2% each year for the past several years and that growth rate is
expected to continue into the future. Then, the dividend in one year can be expected to be

                                     . If the current stock price is $12.50 per share, then that cost of equity is estimated
as

 THINK IT THROUGH
 Using the Constant Dividend Growth Model

  What does an increase in the price of a company's stock imply about the equity cost of capital for the
  company? To find out what the constant dividend growth model suggests, assume that the stock price for
  Bluebonnet Industries increases to $16.50 per share. If there is no expectation that the growth rate of the
  dividends will increase, what would the new estimated equity cost of capital be?
  Solution:
  Using the price of $16.50 per share in the constant dividend growth model equation results in an estimated
  equity cost of capital of

  Thus, an increase in the price of the stock, holding all of the other variables in the equation constant,
  implies that the equity cost of capital drops to 11.27%.

 17.3 Calculating the Weighted Average Cost of Capital

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Calculate the weighted average cost of capital (WACC).
  · Describe issues that arise from estimating the cost of equity capital.
  · Describe the use of net debt in calculating WACC.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          17.3 · Calculating the Weighted Average Cost of Capital 513

Once you know the weights in a company's capital structure and have estimated the costs of the different
sources of its capital, you can calculate the company's weighted average cost of capital (WACC).

WACC Equation

WACC is calculated using the equation

D%, P%, and E% represent the weight of debt, preferred stock, and common equity, respectively, in the capital

structure. Note that                      must equal 100% because the company must account for 100% of its

financing. The after-tax cost of debt is  . The cost of preferred stock capital is represented by rpfd, and

the cost of common stock capital is represented by re.

For a company that does not issue preferred stock, P% is equal to zero, and the WACC equation is simply

Earlier in this chapter, we calculated the weights in Bluebonnet Industries' capital structure to be

and  . We also calculated the after-tax cost of debt for Bluebonnet to be 4.99%. If we use the CAPM

to estimate the cost of equity capital for the firm, Bluebonnet's WACC is computed as

If we use the constant dividend discount model to estimate the cost of equity for Bluebonnet Industries, the
WACC is computed as

Calculating WACC in Practice

The equation for calculating WACC is straightforward. However, issues come up when financial managers
calculate WACC in practice. Both the weights of the equity components and the cost of the equity components
are needed to calculate the WACC. The WACC that financial managers derive will depend on the assumptions
and models they use to determine what weights and capital costs to use.

Issues in Estimating the Cost of Equity Capital

We have explored two ways of estimating the cost of equity capital: the CAPM and the constant dividend
growth model. Often, these methods will produce similar estimates of the cost of capital; seldom will the two
methods provide the same value.

In our example for Bluebonnet Industries, the CAPM estimated the cost of equity capital as 13.4%. The
constant dividend growth model estimated the cost of capital as 14.24%. The exact value of the WACC
calculation depends on which of these estimates is used. It is important to remember that the WACC is an
estimate that is based on a number of assumptions that financial managers made.

For example, using the CAPM requires assumptions be made regarding the values of the risk-free interest rate,
the market risk premium, and a firm's beta. The risk-free interest rate is generally determined using US
Treasury security yields. In theory, the yield on US Treasury securities that have a maturity equivalent to the
length of the company's investors' investment horizon should be used. It is common for financial analysts to
use yields on long-term US Treasury bonds to determine the risk-free rate.

To estimate the market risk premium, analysts turn to historical data. Because this historical data is used to
estimate the future market risk premium, the question arises of how many years of historical data should be
used. Using more years of historical data can lead to more accurate estimates of what the average past return
has been, but very old data may have little relevance if today's financial market environment is different from
what it was in the past. Old data may have little relevance for investors' expectations today. Typical market risk
premiums used by financial managers range from 5% to 8%.
514 17 · How Firms Raise Capital

       The same issue with how much historical data should be considered arises when calculating a company's beta.
       Different financial managers can calculate significantly different betas even for well-established, stable
       companies. In April 2021, for example, the beta for IBM was reported as 0.97 by MarketWatch and as 1.25 by
       Yahoo! Finance.
       The CAPM estimate of the cost of equity capital for IBM is significantly different depending on what source is
       used for the company's beta and what value is used for the market risk premium. Using a market risk
       premium of 5%, the beta of 0.97 provided by MarketWatch, and a risk-free rate of 3% results in a cost of capital
       of

       If, instead, a market risk premium of 8% and the beta of 1.25 provided by Yahoo! Finance are used, the cost of
       capital is estimated to be

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

Estimating the Equity Cost of Capital

Although the calculation of the cost of capital using the CAPM equation is simple and straightforward, there
is not one definitive equity cost of capital for a company that all financial managers will agree on. Consider
the eight companies spotlighted in Table 17.3.

Four estimates of the equity cost of capital are calculated for each firm. The first two estimates are based
on the beta provided by MarketWatch for each of the companies. A risk-free rate of 3% is assumed. Market
risk premiums of both 5% and of 8% are considered. A market risk premium of 5% would suggest that long-
run investors who hold a well-diversified portfolio, such as one with all of the stocks in the S&P 500, will
average a return 5 percentage points higher than the risk-free rate, or 8%. If you assume instead that the
average long-run return on the S&P 500 is 11%, then people who purchase a portfolio of those stocks are
rewarded by earning 8 percentage points more than the 3% they would earn investing in the risk-free
security.

The last two estimates of the cost of equity capital for each company also use the same risk-free rate of 3%
and the possible market risk premiums of 5% and 8%. The only difference is that the beta provided by
Yahoo! Finance is used in the calculation.

        Company                  Industry            MarketWatch  Yahoo! Finance

                                                     Beta MRP = 5% MRP = 8% Beta MRP = 5% MRP = 8%

Kroger                           Food retail         0.31 4.55% 5.48% 0.66 6.30% 8.28%

Coca-Cola                        Nonalcoholic beverages 0.69 6.45% 8.52% 0.62 6.10% 7.96%

AT&T                             Telecommunications 0.74 6.70% 8.92% 0.74 6.70% 8.92%

Kraft Heinz                      Food products       0.82 7.10% 9.56% 1.14 8.70% 12.12%

Microsoft                        Software            1.19 8.95% 12.52% 0.79 6.95% 9.32%

Goodyear Tire and Rubber Tires                       1.24 9.20% 12.92% 2.26 14.30% 21.08%

American Airlines                Passenger airlines  1.34 9.70% 13.72% 1.93 12.65% 18.44%

KB Homes                         Residential construction 1.42 10.10% 14.36% 1.83 12.15% 17.64%

Table 17.3 Estimates of Equity Cost of Capital for Eight Companies (source: Yahoo! Finance; MarketWatch)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          17.3 · Calculating the Weighted Average Cost of Capital 515

  The range of the equity cost of capital estimates for each of the firms is significant. Consider, for example,
  Goodyear Tire and Rubber. According to MarketWatch, the beta for the company is 1.24, resulting in an
  estimated cost of equity capital between 9.20% and 12.92%. The beta provided by Yahoo! Finance is much
  higher, at 2.26. Using this higher beta results in an estimated equity cost of capital for Goodyear Tire and
  Rubber between 14.30% and 21.08%. This leaves the financial managers of Goodyear Tire and Rubber with
  an estimate of the equity cost of capital between 9.20% and 21.08%, using a range of reasonable
  assumptions.

  What is a financial manager to do when one estimate is more than twice as large as another estimate? A
  financial manager who believes the equity cost of capital is close to 9% is likely to make very different
  choices from one who believes the cost is closer to 21%. This is why it is important for a financial manager
  to have a broad understanding of the operations of a particular company. First, the manager must know
  the historical background from which these numbers were derived. It is not enough for the manager to
  know that beta is estimated as 1.24 or 2.26; the manager must be able to determine why the estimates are
  so different. Second, the manager must be familiar enough with the company and the economic
  environment to draw a conclusion about what set of assumptions will most likely be reasonable going
  forward. While these numbers are based on historical data, the financial manager's main concern is what
  the numbers will be going forward.

  It is evident that estimating the equity cost of capital is not a simple task for companies. Although we do
  see a wide range of estimates in the table, some general principles emerge. First, the average company has
  a beta of 1. With a risk-free rate of 3% and a market risk premium in the range of 5% to 8%, the cost of
  equity capital will fall within a range of 8% to 11% for the average company. Companies that have a beta
  less than 1 will have an equity cost of capital that falls below this range, and companies that have a beta
  greater than 1 will have an equity cost of capital that rises above this range.

  Recall that a company's beta is heavily influenced by the type of industry. Grocery stores and providers of
  food products, for example, tend to have betas less than 1. During recessionary times, people still eat, but
  during expansionary times, people do not significantly increase their spending on these products. Thus,
  companies such as Kroger, Coca-Cola, and Kraft Heinz will tend to have low betas and a range of equity cost
  of capital below 8% to 11%.

  The sales of companies in other industries tend to be much more volatile. During expansionary periods,
  people fly to vacation destinations and purchase new homes. During recessionary periods, families cut back
  on these discretionary expenditures. Thus, companies such as American Airlines and KB Homes will have
  higher betas and ranges of equity cost of capital that exceed the 8% to 11% average. The higher equity cost
  of capital is needed to incentivize investors to invest in these companies with riskier cash flows rather than
  in lower-risk companies.

The CAPM estimate depends on assumptions made, but issues also exist with the constant dividend growth
model. First, the constant dividend growth model can be used only for companies that pay dividends. Second,
the model assumes that the dividends will grow at a constant rate in the future, an assumption that is not
always reasonable. It also assumes that the financial manager accurately forecasts the growth rate of
dividends; any error in this forecast results in an error in estimating the cost of equity capital.

Given the differences in assumptions made when using the constant dividend growth model and the CAPM to
estimate the equity cost of capital, it is not surprising that the numbers from the two models differ. When
estimating the cost of equity capital for a particular firm, financial managers must examine the assumptions
made for both approaches and decide which set of assumptions is more realistic for that particular company.
516 17 · How Firms Raise Capital

       Net Debt

       Many practitioners use net debt rather than total debt when calculating the weights for WACC. Net debt is the
       amount of debt that would remain if a company used all of its liquid assets to pay off as much debt as
       possible. Net debt is calculated as the firm's total debt, both short-term and long-term, minus the firm's cash
       and cash equivalents. Cash equivalents are current assets that can quickly and easily be converted into cash,
       such as Treasury bills, commercial paper, and marketable securities.

       Consider, for example, Apple, which had $112.436 billion in total debt in 2020. The company also had $38.016
       billion in cash and cash equivalents. This meant that the net debt for Apple was only $74.420 billion. If Apple
       used all of its cash and cash equivalents to pay debt, it would be left with $74.420 billion in debt.2

       Cash and cash equivalents can be viewed as negative debt. For firms with relatively low levels of cash, this
       adjustment will not have a large impact on the overall WACC estimate. However, the adjustment can be
       important for firms that hold substantial cash reserves.

      17.4 Capital Structure Choices

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Distinguish between a levered and an unlevered firm.
         · Explain why the choice of capital structure does not impact the value of a firm in perfect financial markets.
         · Calculate the interest tax shield.
         · Explain how the interest tax shield encourages the use of leverage.

       So far, we have taken the company's capital structure as given. Each firm's capital structure, however, is a
       result of intentional decisions made by the financial managers of the company. We now turn our attention to
       the issues that financial managers consider when making these decisions.

      The Unlevered Firm

       Let's begin our discussion of capital structure choices by exploring the financing decisions you would face if
       you were to start a T-shirt business. Suppose that your hometown will host an international cycling
       competition. The competition itself will last for a month; cyclists will arrive early to train in the local climate.
       News coverage will be significant, meaning a lot of media personnel will be visiting your area. In addition to
       fans attending the event, it is expected that tourism will increase over the next year as recreational cyclists will
       want to ride the route of the professional race. You decide to operate a business for one year that will sell T-
       shirts highlighting this event.

       You will need to make an up-front investment of $40,000 to start the business. You estimate that you will
       generate a cash flow of $52,000, after you cover all of your operating costs, at the end of next year. You know
       that these profits are risky; you think a 10% risk premium is appropriate for the level of riskiness of the
       business. If the risk-free rate is 4%, this means that the appropriate discount rate for you to use is 14%. The
       value of this business opportunity is

       This looks as if it will be a profitable business that should be undertaken. However, you do not have the
       $40,000 for the up-front investment and will need to raise it.

       First, consider raising money solely by selling ownership shares to your family and friends. How much would
       those shares be worth? The value of the stock would be equal to the present value of the expected future cash
       flows. The potential stockholders would expect to receive $45,614 in one year. If they agree with you that the
       riskiness of this T-shirt business warrants a discount rate of 14%, then they will value the stock at

        2 "Historical Data." Apple Inc. (AAPL). Yahoo! Finance, accessed October 29, 2021. https://finance.yahoo.com/quote/AAPL/history/

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     17.4 · Capital Structure Choices 517

If you sell all of the equity in the company for $45,614 and purchase the equipment necessary for the project
for $40,000, you have $5,614 to keep as the entrepreneur who created the business.

This business would be financed 100% by equity. The lack of any debt in the capital structure means the firm
would have no financial leverage. The equity in a firm that has no financial leverage is called unlevered
equity.

The Levered Firm

Next, consider borrowing some of the money that you will need to start this T-shirt business. Although the

cash flows from the business are uncertain, suppose you are certain that the business will generate at least

$18,000. (Perhaps you have a guaranteed order from the cycling competition sponsors.) If you borrowed

$17,000 at the risk-free interest rate of 4%, you would owe          to the lenders at the

end of the year. Because you are certain that you will generate at least $18,000 in cash, which is greater than

$17,680, you can borrow the $17,000 without any risk of defaulting.

The $17,000 will not be enough to pay for all the start-up costs. You will also need to raise some capital by

selling equity. Because your firm will have some debt, or financial leverage, the equity that you raise will be

known as levered equity. The equity holders expect the firm to generate $52,000 in cash flows. Debt holders

must be paid before equity holders, so this will leave               for the shareholders.

The expected future cash flows generated by the business are determined by the productivity of its assets, not
the manner in which those assets are financed. It is the present value of these expected future cash flows that
determines the firm's value. Thus, the firm's value in perfect capital markets will not change as a result of the
company taking on leverage.

LINK TO LEARNING

MM Proposition I

Nobel laureates Franco Modigliani and Merton Miller wrote influential papers exploring capital structure
and the cost of a firm's capital. They began by considering what would occur in a perfectly competitive
market. One of the assumptions of this perfect capital market is that there are no taxes. The idea that the
market value of the unlevered and levered firm is the same in perfect capital markets is known in the field
of finance as MM Proposition I.

Visit Milken Institute's 5-Minute Finance site to explore more about Modigliani and Miller's contributions
(https://openstax.org/r/Modigliani) to the understanding of capital structure.

The value of your T-shirt business remains at $45,614. You can calculate the value of the levered equity as

Now, shareholders are willing to pay $28,614 for ownership in this company. They expect to get $34,320 in one
year in return for purchasing this equity. What discount rate does this imply?
518 17 · How Firms Raise Capital

       Notice that the expected return to shareholders has risen from 14% for the unlevered firm to 19.94% for the
       levered firm. Recall that the expected return to shareholders equals the risk-free rate plus a risk premium. The
       risk-free rate has remained 4%. With leverage, the risk premium rises from 10% to 15.94%.
       Why does this risk premium increase? Recall that debt holders are paid before equity holders. Equity holders
       are residual claimants; they will only receive payment if there is money left over after the debt holders are fully
       paid. The business is risky. You are certain that the company will have cash flow of at least $18,000 at the end
       of the year and that $17,680 will be paid to the debt holders. Therefore, if the company performs poorly
       (perhaps bad weather results in the cancellation of much of the cycling competition) and the cash flows fall
       way below what you are expecting, there may be only several hundred dollars left for the shareholders.
       When the firm was unlevered, if the cash flow at the end of the year was only $18,000, the shareholders would
       receive $18,000. When leverage is used, the same cash flow would result in shareholders receiving only $320.
       The risk to the shareholders increases as leverage is used; thus, the risk premium that shareholders require
       also increases as leverage is used.

      Leverage and the WACC

       What happens to the WACC as leverage is used? To figure this out, we must calculate the weights of debt and
       equity in the capital structure:

       In perfect capital markets, an assumption we are making for now, there are no taxes. Because we are using
       only debt and common stock, the weight of preferred stock is zero, and our WACC can be calculated as

       Notice that the use of leverage does not change the WACC. When only equity was used to finance the
       business, stockholders required a 14% expected return to encourage them to let the firm use their capital.
       When leverage was used, the debt holders only required a 4% return. However, the existence of debt holders,
       who stand in front of shareholders in the order of claimants, puts shareholders in a riskier position. There is a
       greater chance that the shareholders will not receive payment from this uncertain business. Thus, the
       shareholders require a higher rate of return to let the leveraged firm use their capital.
       The cost-savings benefits of using lower-cost debt in your company's capital structure are exactly offset by the
       higher return that shareholders require when leverage is used. Mathematically, the increase in the cost of
       equity when leverage is used will be proportional to the debt-equity ratio. Financial managers refer to this
       outcome as MM Proposition II. The relationship is expressed by the formula

       where ru is the required return to equity holders of the unlevered firm.
       Table 17.4 shows how the cost of equity increases as the weight of debt in the capital structure increases. As
       the company uses more debt, the risk to equity holders increases. Because equity holders risk that there will
       be no residual money after bondholders are paid, the equity holders require a higher rate of return to invest in
       the company as its use of leverage increases. Although debt holders face less risk than equity holders, the risk
       that they face increases as the amount of debt the company takes on increases. Once the company's debt
       exceeds its guaranteed cash flow, which is $18,000 in our example, debt holders face some risk that the
       company will not be able to pay them. At that point, the cost of debt rises above the risk-free rate. As the

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       17.4 · Capital Structure Choices 519

weight of debt approaches 100%, the cost of debt capital approaches the cost of equity of the unlevered firm.
In other words, if you financed the T-shirt business solely through the use of debt, the debt holders would
require a 14% return because they would be bearing the entire risk of the business and would demand to be
rewarded for doing so.

As the leverage of the firm increases, both the cost of debt capital and the cost of equity capital increase.
However, as the firm's leverage increases, it is using proportionately more of the relatively cheaper source of
capital--debt-- and proportionately less of the relatively more expensive source of capital--equity. Thus, the
WACC remains constant as leverage increases, despite the rising cost of each component.

Amount of Debt Amount of Equity Weight of Debt Weight of Equity Cost of Debt Cost of Equity WACC

$ -      $45,614              0%                                           100%  0.0400      0.1400 14%

$5,000   $40,614              11%                                          89%   0.0400      0.1523 14%

$10,000  $35,614              22%                                          78%   0.0400      0.1681 14%

$15,000  $30,614              33%                                          67%   0.0400      0.1890 14%

$17,000  $28,614              37%                                          63%   0.0400      0.1994 14%

$20,000  $25,614              44%                                          56%   0.0600      0.2025 14%

$30,000  $15,614              66%                                          34%   0.0800      0.2553 14%

$40,000  $5,614               88%                                          12%   0.1000      0.4250 14%

Table 17.4 Alternative Capital Structures for Your T-Shirt Business

The Impact of Taxes

In perfect capital markets, the choice of capital structure will not impact the value of the firm or the cost of the
firm's financing. In the real world, however, capital markets are not perfect. One of the important market
imperfections is the presence of corporate taxes. Because the choice of capital structure can impact the taxes
that a company pays, in the real world, capital structure can impact the cost of capital and the firm's value.

Assume that your T-shirt business venture will result in earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) of $52,000
next year and that the corporate tax rate is 28%. If your company is unlevered, it has no interest expense, and
its net income will be $37,440, as shown in Table 17.5.

                              Without Leverage With Leverage

         EBIT                      $52,000.00                                    $52,000.00

         Interest Expense                                            0.00        280.00

         Income before Taxes       52,000.00                                     51,720.00

         Taxes (28%)               14,560.00                                     14,481.60

         Net Income                $37,440.00                              $37,238.40

         Table 17.5 Net Income and Leverage

If your company uses leverage, raising $7,000 of financing by issuing debt with a 4% interest rate, it will have
an interest expense of $280. This lowers its taxable income to $51,720 and its taxes to $14,481.60. Because
interest is a tax-deductible expense, using leverage lowers the company's taxes.

Table 17.6 shows that the company's net income is lower with leverage than it would be without leverage. In
other words, debt obligations will reduce the value of the equity. However, less equity is needed because some
of the firm is financed through debt. The important consideration is how the use of leverage changes the total
520 17 · How Firms Raise Capital

amount of dollars available to all investors. Table 17.6 shows this impact.

                                       Without Leverage With Leverage

    Interest Paid to Debt Holders                    $0.00                   $280.00

    Amount Available to Stockholders                 37,440.00               37,238.40

    Total Available for All Investors                $37,440.00              $37,518.40

    Table 17.6 Total Dollars Available to Investors

Using leverage allows the firm to generate $37,518.40 to pay its investors, compared to only $37,440 that is
available if the firm is unlevered. Where does the extra $78.40 to pay investors come from? It comes from the
reduction in taxes that the firm pays due to leverage. If the company uses no debt, it pays $14,560 in taxes. The
levered firm pays only $14,481.60 in taxes, a savings of $78.40.

The $280 that the levered company pays in interest is shielded from the corporate tax, resulting in tax savings

of                                . The additional amount available to investors because of the tax deductibility of

interest payments is known as the interest tax shield. The interest tax shield is calculated as

When interest is a tax-deductible expense, the total value of the levered firm will exceed the value of the
unlevered firm by the amount of this interest tax shield. The tax-advantage status of debt financing impacts
the WACC. The WACC with taxes is calculated as

This formula can be written as

Thus, the WACC with taxes is lower than the pretax WACC because of the interest tax shield. The more debt the
firm has, the greater the dollar amount of this interest tax shield. The presence of the interest tax shield
encourages firms to use debt financing in their capital structures.

 17.5 Optimal Capital Structure

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Explain how increased use of leverage increases the possibility of financial distress.
  · Explain how the possibility of financial distress impacts the cost of capital.
  · Discuss the trade-offs a firm faces as it increases its leverage.
  · Explain the concept of an optimal capital structure.

Debt and Financial Distress

The more debt a company uses in its capital structure, the larger the dollar value of the interest tax shield.
Why, then, do we not see firms using a capital structure composed 100% of debt to maximize this interest tax
shield?
The answer to this question lies in the fact that as a company increases its debt, there is a greater chance that
the firm will be unable to make its required interest payments on the debt. If the firm has difficulty meeting its

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                             17.5 · Optimal Capital Structure 521

debt obligations, it is said to be in financial distress.

A firm in financial distress incurs both direct and indirect costs. The direct costs of financial distress include
fees paid to lawyers, consultants, appraisers, and auctioneers. The indirect costs include loss of customers and
suppliers.

Trade-Off Theory

Trade-off theory weighs the advantages and disadvantages of using debt in the capital structure. The
advantage of using debt is the interest tax shield. The disadvantage of using debt is that it increases the risk of
financial distress and the costs associated with financial distress.

A company has an incentive to increase leverage to exploit the interest tax shield. However, too much debt will
make it more likely that the company will default and incur financial distress costs. Calculating the precise
balance between these two is difficult if not impossible.

For companies with a low level of debt, the risk of default is low, and the main impact of an increase in
leverage will be an increase in the interest tax shield. At some point, however, the tax savings that result from
increasing the amount of debt in the capital structure will be just offset by the increased probability of
incurring the costs of financial distress. For firms that have higher costs of financing distress, this point will be
reached sooner. Thus, firms that face higher costs of financial distress have a lower optimal level of leverage
than firms that face lower costs of financial distress.

 LINK TO LEARNING

 Netflix

  Netflix has experienced phenomenal growth in the past 25 years. Starting as a DVD rental company, Netflix
  quickly shifted its model to content streaming. In recent years, the company has become a major producer
  of content, and it is currently the largest media/entertainment company by market capitalization. It is
  expensive for Netflix to fund the production of this content. Netflix has funded much of its content through
  selling debt.

  You can view the company's explanation of this capital structure choice by looking at the answers the
  company provides to common investor questions (https://openstax.org/r/the-company-provides). You can
  also find the company's financial statements on its website and see how the level of debt on Netflix's
  balance sheet has increased over the past few years.

Figure 17.4 demonstrates how the value of a levered firm varies with the level of debt financing used. Vu is the
value of the unlevered firm, or the firm with no debt. As the firm begins to add debt to its capital structure, the
value of the firm increases due to the interest tax shield. The more debt the company takes on, the greater the
tax benefit it receives, up until the point at which the company's interest expense exceeds its earnings before
interest and taxes (EBIT). Once the interest expense equals EBIT, the firm will have no taxable income. There is
no tax benefit from paying more interest after that point.
522 17 · How Firms Raise Capital

                                                           Figure 17.4 Maximum Value of a Levered Firm

As the firm increases debt and increases the value of the tax benefit of debt, it also increases the probability of
facing financial distress. The magnitude of the costs of financial distress increases as the debt level of the
company rises. To some degree, these costs offset the benefit of the interest tax shield.

The optimal debt level occurs at the point at which the value of the firm is maximized. A company will use this
optimal debt level to determine what the weight of debt should be in its target capital structure. The optimal
capital structure is the target. Recall that the market values of a company's debt and equity are used to
determine the costs of capital and the weights in the capital structure. Because market values change daily
due to economic conditions, slight variations will occur in the calculations from one day to the next. It is
neither practical nor desirable for a firm to recalculate its optimal capital structure each day.

Also, a company will not want to make adjustments for minor differences between its actual capital structure
and its optimal capital structure. For example, if a company has determined that its optimal capital structure is
22.5% debt and 77.5% equity but finds that its current capital structure is 23.1% debt and 76.9% equity, it is
close to its target. Reducing debt and increasing equity would require transaction costs that might be quite
significant.

Table 17.7 shows the average WACC for some common industries. The calculations are based on corporate
information at the end of December 2020. A risk-free rate of 3% and a market-risk premium of 5% are assumed
in the calculations. You can see that the capital structure used by firms varies widely by industry. Companies in
the online retail industry are financed almost entirely through equity capital; on average, less than 7% of the
capital comes from debt for those companies. On the other hand, companies in the rubber and tires industry
tend to use a heavy amount of debt in their capital structure. With a debt weight of 63.62%, almost two-thirds
of the capital for these companies comes from debt.

      Industry Name               Equity Weight Debt Weight Beta Cost of Equity Tax Rate After-Tax WACC
                                                                                                                        Cost of Debt
Retail (online)
Computers/peripherals             93.33%  6.67% 1.16   8.82% 2.93%  2.19% 8.38%
Household products
Drugs (pharmaceutical)            91.45%  8.55% 1.18   8.92% 3.71%  1.88% 8.32%

                                  87.07%  12.93% 0.73  6.65% 5.06%  2.19% 6.07%

                                  84.62%  15.38% 0.91  7.54% 1.88%  2.19% 6.72%

Table 17.7 Capital Structure, Cost of Debt, Cost of Equity, and WACC for Selected Industries (data source: Aswath
Damodaran Online)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                17.6 · Alternative Sources of Funds 523

Industry Name              Equity Weight Debt Weight Beta Cost of Equity Tax Rate After-Tax WACC
                                                                                                                 Cost of Debt

Retail (general)           82.41%  17.59% 0.90  7.49% 12.48%   1.88% 6.51%

Beverages (soft)           82.24%  17.76% 0.79  6.96% 3.32%    2.19% 6.11%

Tobacco                    76.74%  23.26% 0.72  6.61% 8.69%    1.88% 5.51%

Homebuilding               75.34%  24.66% 1.46  10.29% 15.91%  2.19% 8.30%

Food processing            75.18%  24.82% 0.64  6.18% 8.56%    2.19% 5.19%

Restaurants/dining         74.79%  25.21% 1.34  9.72% 3.19%    2.19% 7.82%

Apparel                    71.74%  28.26% 1.10  8.49% 4.75%    2.19% 6.71%

Farming/agriculture        68.94%  31.06% 0.87  7.37% 6.45%    1.88% 5.67%

Packaging & containers     64.47%  35.53% 0.92  7.61% 15.67%   1.88% 5.57%

Food wholesalers           64.10%  35.90% 1.03  8.17% 0.52%    2.19% 6.02%

Hotels/gaming              63.60%  36.40% 1.56  10.82% 2.02%   2.19% 7.68%

Telecom. services          54.60%  45.40% 0.66  6.30% 3.93%    1.40% 4.07%

Retail (grocery and food)  51.46%  48.54% 0.24  4.21% 13.52%   2.19% 3.23%

Air transport              38.26%  61.74% 1.61  11.04% 6.00%   2.19% 5.58%

Rubber & tires             36.38%  63.62% 1.09  8.47% 5.30%    1.88% 4.28%

Table 17.7 Capital Structure, Cost of Debt, Cost of Equity, and WACC for Selected Industries (data source: Aswath
Damodaran Online)

Industries that have high betas, such as hotels/gaming and air transport, have high equity costs of capital.
More recession-proof industries, such as food processing and household products, have low betas and low
equity costs of capital. The WACC for each industry ends up being influenced by the weights of equity and debt
the company chooses, the riskiness of the industry, and the tax rates faced by companies in the industry.

 17.6 Alternative Sources of Funds

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Calculate the required return to preferred shareholders.
  · Calculate the WACC of a firm that issues preferred shares.
  · Discuss how issuing new equity impacts the cost of equity capital.
  · Explain the functionality of convertible debt.

A company can finance its assets in two ways: through debt financing and through equity financing. Thus far,
we have treated these sources as two broad categories, each with a single cost of capital. In reality, a company
may have different types of debt or equity, each with its own cost of capital. The same principle would apply:
the WACC of the firm would be calculated using the weights of each of these types multiplied by the cost of
that particular type of debt or equity capital.

Preferred Shares

Although our calculations of WACC thus far have assumed that companies finance their assets only through
debt and common equity, we saw at the beginning of the chapter that the basic WACC formula is

In addition to common stock, a company can raise equity capital by issuing preferred stock. Owners of
524 17 · How Firms Raise Capital

       preferred stock are promised a fixed dividend, which must be paid before any dividends can be paid to
       common stockholders.
       In the order of claimants, preferred shareholders stand in line between bondholders and common
       shareholders. Bondholders are paid interest before preferred shareholders are paid annual dividends.
       Preferred shareholders are paid annual dividends before common shareholders are paid dividends. Should
       the company face bankruptcy, the same priority of claimants is followed in settling claims--first bondholders,
       then preferred stockholders, with common stockholders standing at the end of the line.
       Preferred stock shares some characteristics with debt financing. It has a promised cash flow to its holders.
       Unlike common equity, the dividend on preferred stock is fixed and known. Also, there are consequences if
       those preferred dividends are not paid. Common shareholders cannot receive any dividends until preferred
       dividends are paid, and in some cases, preferred shareholders receive voting rights until they are paid the
       dividends that are due. However, preferred shareholders cannot force the company into bankruptcy as debt
       holders can. For tax and legal purposes, preferred stock is treated as equity.
       The cost of the preferred equity capital is calculated using the formula

       Suppose that Greene Building Company has issued preferred stock that pays a dividend of $2.00 each year. If
       this preferred stock is selling for $21.80 per share, then the company's cost of preferred stock is

       THINK IT THROUGH
       Calculating Common Equity Financing

         Greene Building Company uses 40% debt, 15% preferred stock, and 45% common stock in its capital
         structure. The yield to maturity on the company's bonds is 7.2%. The cost of preferred equity is 9.17%. In
         the most recent year, Greene paid a dividend of $3.15 to its common shareholders. This dividend has been
         growing at a rate of 3.0% per year, which is expected to continue in the future. The company's common
         stock is trading for $32.25 per share. Greene pays a corporate tax rate of 21%. Estimate the WACC for
         Greene.
         Solution:
         The cost of Greene's common equity financing must be calculated. This can be done using the constant
         dividend growth model:

         The weights and the costs for each component of capital are placed in the WACC formula:

         The WACC for Greene Building Company is estimated to be 9.47%. Note that debt financing is the cheapest
         cost of capital for Greene. The reason for this is twofold. First, because debt holders face the least amount
         of risk because they are paid first in the order of claimants, they require a lower return. Second, because
         interest payments are tax-deductible, the interest tax shield lowers the effective cost of debt to the

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                         17.6 · Alternative Sources of Funds 525

  company. Preferred shareholders will require a higher rate of return than debt holders, 9.17%, because
  they are later in the order of claimants. Common shareholders are the residual claimants, standing at the
  end of the line to receive payment. After all other claimants are paid, any remaining money belongs to the
  shareholders. If this residual amount is small, the common shareholders receive a small payment. If there is
  nothing left after all other claimants have been paid, common shareholders receive nothing. Thus, common
  shareholders have the greatest amount of risk and require the highest rate of return.
  Also, note that the weights for debt, preferred stock, and common stock in the capital structure sum to
  100%. The company must finance 100% of its assets.

Issuing New Common Stock

An existing firm can acquire equity capital to expand its assets in two ways: the retention of earnings or the
sale of new shares of stock. Thus far in the chapter, the cost of equity capital calculations have assumed that
the earnings were being retained for equity capital financing.
The net income that is left after all expenses are paid is the residual income that belongs to the shareholders.
Instead of receiving a fixed payment for letting the firm use their capital (like bondholders who receive fixed
interest payments), the reward to shareholders for letting the company use their capital varies from year to
year. In a good year, net income and the reward to shareholders is high. In a poor year, net income is low or
perhaps even negative.
The net income can either be paid immediately and directly to shareholders in the form of dividends or be
retained within the company to fund growth. Shareholders are willing to allow the company to retain these
earnings because they expect that the money will be used to fund profitable projects, leading to an even larger
reward for shareholders in future years.
Although managers do not need to actively solicit the funds that are retained to fund the business, managers
cannot view these funds as costless. The shareholders will require a return on those funds to entice them to
allow the company to delay paying the dollars to them immediately in terms of a dividend.
Suppose a company has $1 million in net income one year. If it pays $250,000 in dividends and retains
$750,000, then it can finance $750,000 more in assets. If the company has a capital structure of 25% debt and
75% equity and wants to maintain that capital structure, it must increase its debt by $250,000 to balance the
increase in equity. Thus, the company would be increasing its total financing by $1 million. Of that financing,
25% would be debt financing, and 75% would be equity financing.
To increase its assets by more than $1 million, the company would need to decide to either change its capital
structure or issue new stock. Consider the firm represented by the market-value balance sheet in Figure 17.5.
The firm has $900 million in assets. These assets are financed by $225 million in debt capital and $675 million
in equity capital, resulting in a capital structure of 25% debt and 75% equity.

Figure 17.5 Market-Value Balance Sheet for a Company with $900 Million in Assets and a Capital Structure of 25% Debt and
75% Equity

The retained earnings of $750,000 cause the equity on the balance sheet to increase to $675.75 million. The
526 17 · How Firms Raise Capital

       company could sell $250,000 in bonds, increasing its debt to $225.25 million. Figure 17.6 shows the impact on
       the balance sheet. The company has increased its financing by $1,000,000 and can expand assets by
       $1,000,000. The capital structure remains 25% debt and 75% equity.

                           Figure 17.6 Balance Sheet with $1 Million Growth Financed through Retained Earnings and New Debt

       What if the economy is in an expansionary period and this company thinks it has the opportunity to grow at a
       rate of 5%? The company knows that it will need more assets to be able to grow. If it needs 5% more assets, its
       assets will need to increase to $945 million. To increase the left-hand side of its balance sheet, the company
       will also need to increase the right-hand side of the balance sheet.
       Where does the company get the $45 million in capital? With $750,000 in retained earnings, the company can
       increase its equity to $675.75 million, but if the remainder of $44.25 million was financed through debt, the
       company's capital structure would change. Its weight of debt would increase to

       If the company has determined that its optimal capital structure is 25% debt and 75% equity, financing the
       majority of the growth through debt would cause it to stray from these levels. Funding the growth while
       keeping the capital structure the same would require the firm to issue new shares. Figure 17.7 shows how the
       firm would need to finance $45 million in growth while maintaining its desirable capital structure. The firm
       would need to increase equity capital to $708.75 million; retained earnings could provide $750,000, but $33
       million of new equity would need to be sold.

                    Figure 17.7 Balance Sheet with $45,000,000 in Financing Coming from Debt, Retained Earnings, and New Stock

       Investors who are providing common equity financing require a return to entice them to let the company use
       their money. If this company has paid $0.50 per share in dividends to shareholders and this dividend is
       expected to increase by 3% each year, we can use the constant dividend growth model to estimate how much
       common shareholders require. If the stock is trading for $8.00 per share, the cost of common equity financing
       is estimated as

       If, however, the firm must issue more equity, its cost of equity for those additional shares will be higher than
       9.44%. Even if shareholders are willing to pay $8.00 per share for the stock, the firm will incur flotation costs;
       this means the firm will not receive the entire $8.00 to use to finance new assets and generate a profit for
       shareholders. Flotation costs include the costs of filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) as

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                         17.6 · Alternative Sources of Funds 527

well as the fees paid to investment bankers to place the new shares.
When new equity must be issued to finance the company, the flotation costs must be subtracted from the
price of the stock to determine the net proceeds the firm will receive. The cost of this new equity capital is
calculated as

where F represents the flotation costs of the new stock issue. If, in this example, the flotation cost is $0.25 per
share, then the cost of raising new equity capital is

Issuing new common equity is the most expensive form of raising capital. Equity capital is already expensive
because the common shareholders are the residual claimants who will only be paid if all other claimants are
paid. Because of this risk, they require a higher rate of return than providers of capital who have precedence in
the order of claimants. Flotation costs must be added to this equity cost when new shares are issued to grow
the company.

 THINK IT THROUGH
 Cost of Issuing New Equity

  You are a financial manager for American Motor Works (AMW). The target capital structure for the company
  is 30% debt and 70% equity. You know that your company's after-tax cost of debt is 4.6%. Your company
  paid a dividend of $3 per share last year, and it has a policy of increasing its dividend at a rate of 1.5% each
  year. AMW stock is currently trading for $27.50 per share. You estimate that the company's retained
  earnings will be $10 million this year. If the company needs to issue new shares of stock, flotation costs are
  expected to be $0.75 per share.
  Given this information, you are tasked with calculating the company's WACC. You need to provide an
  estimate of WACC if retained earnings are used and an estimate if new equity must be issued.
  Solution:
  First, calculate the cost of equity capital for AMW using the constant dividend growth model:

  Using 12.57% as the equity cost of capital and 4.6% as the after-tax cost of debt, the WACC is calculated as

  The WACC for AMW when it is using retained earnings for equity financing is 10.18%. If the company has
  $10 million in retained earnings this year, its equity will increase by $10 million. Given its target capital
  structure of 30% debt and 70% equity, AMW will be able to increase its overall financing by

                                         by using its retained earnings and issuing new debt of $4,285,714.
  If AMW wants to expand its assets by more than $14,285,714 during the next year, it will need to issue new
  stock or increase the weight of debt in its capital structure. The company will incur flotation costs of $0.65
  per share to issue new stock. The cost of new equity capital will be
528 17 · How Firms Raise Capital

With this more expensive newly issued equity capital, AMW's WACC will become

If AMW wants to take on a large project that requires investment in more than $14,285,714 worth of assets,
such as building a new production facility, the company will need to issue more equity and will face a higher
WACC than when using retained earnings as its equity financing.

Convertible Debt

Some companies issue convertible bonds. These corporate bonds have a provision that gives the bondholder
the option of converting each bond held into a fixed number of shares of common stock. The number of
common shares the bondholder would receive for each bond is known as the conversion ratio.

Suppose that you own a convertible bond issued by Sheridan Sodas with a face value of $1,000 and a

conversion ratio of 20 shares that matures today. If you convert the bond today, you will receive 20 shares of

Sheridan common stock. If you do not convert, you will receive $1,000. If you convert, you are basically paying

$1,000 for 20 shares of Sheridan stock. The conversion price is  If Sheridan is trading for more

than $50 per share, you would want to convert. If Sheridan is trading for less than $50 per share, you would

not want to convert; you would prefer the $1,000. In other words, you will choose to convert whenever the

stock price exceeds the conversion price at maturity.

A convertible bond gives the holder an option; the bondholder is able to choose between the face value cash
or receiving shares of stock. Options always have a positive value to holders. It is always preferable to be able
to choose $1,000 or shares of stock than to simply be given $1,000. There is a possibility that the shares of
stock will be more valuable, and there is no way the choice can put you in a worse position.

Because holders of convertible bonds have the valuable option of conversion that holders of nonconvertible
bonds do not have, convertible debt can be offered with a lower interest rate. It might seem as if the firm
could lower its weighted average cost of capital by issuing convertible debt rather than nonconvertible debt.
However, this is not the case. Remember that holders of convertible bonds choose whether they would prefer
to convert the bond and become a stockholder or receive the face value of the bond at maturity.

If a bond has a face value of $1,000, the convertible bond holders will consider whether the stock they can
convert to is worth more than $1,000. Only when the price of the stock has increased enough that the value of
the stock received is more than $1,000 will the bondholders convert. However, this means that instead of
paying $1,000, the firm is paying the bondholder in stock worth more than $1,000. In essence, the firm (and
the current shareholders) would be selling an equity position in the company for less than the market price of
that equity position. The lower interest rate compensates for the possibility that conversion will occur.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                               17 · Summary 529

     Summary

17.1 The Concept of Capital Structure

Capital structure refers to how a company finances its assets. The two main sources of capital are debt
financing and equity financing. A cost of capital exists because investors want a return equivalent to what they
would receive on an investment with an equivalent risk to persuade them to let the company use their funds.
The market values of debt and equity are used to calculate the weights of the components of the capital
structure.

17.2 The Costs of Debt and Equity Capital

The yield to maturity (YTM) on a company's outstanding bonds represents the return that debt holders are
requiring to lend money to the company. Because interest expenses are tax-deductible, the cost of debt to the
company is less than the YTM. The cost of equity capital is not directly observed, so financial managers must
estimate this cost. Two common methods for estimating the cost of equity capital are the constant dividend
growth model and the capital asset pricing model (CAPM).

17.3 Calculating the Weighted Average Cost of Capital

Calculate the weighted average cost of capital (WACC) using the formula

Remember that the WACC is an estimate; different methods of estimating the cost of equity capital can lead to
different estimations of WACC.

17.4 Capital Structure Choices

An unlevered firm uses no debt in its capital structure. A levered firm uses both debt and equity in its capital
structure. In perfect financial markets, the value of the firm will be the same regardless of the firm's decision
to use leverage. With the tax deductibility of interest expenses, however, the value of the firm can increase
through the use of debt. As the level of debt increases, the value of the interest tax shield increases.

17.5 Optimal Capital Structure

A company wants to choose a capital structure that maximizes its value. Although increasing the level of
financial leverage, or debt, in the capital structure increases the value of the interest tax shield, it also
increases the probability of financial distress. As the weight of debt in the capital structure increases, the
return that providers of both debt and equity capital require to entice them to provide money to the firm
increases because their risk increases. Trade-off theory suggests that the value of a company that uses debt
equals the value of the unlevered firm plus the value of the interest tax shield minus financial distress costs.

17.6 Alternative Sources of Funds

Preferred stock is a type of equity capital; the owners of preferred stock receive preferential treatment over
common stockholders in the order of claimants. A fixed dividend is paid to preferred shareholders and must
be paid before common shareholders receive dividends. Equity capital can be raised through either retaining
earnings or selling new shares of stock. Significant flotation costs are associated with issuing new shares of
stock, making it the most expensive source of financing. Convertible debt allows the debt holders to convert
their debt into a fixed number of common shares instead of receiving the face value of the stock at maturity.

     Key Terms

after-tax cost of debt the net cost of interest on a company's debt after taxes; the firm's effective cost of
    debt

capital a company's sources of financing
530 17 · CFA Institute

capital structure the percentages of a company's assets that are financed by debt capital, preferred stock
    capital, and common stock capital

conversion price the face value of a convertible bond divided by its conversion ratio
conversion ratio the number of shares of common stock receivable for each convertible bond that is

    converted
convertible bonds bonds that can be converted into a fixed number of shares of common stock upon

    maturity
financial distress when a firm has trouble meeting debt obligations
financial leverage the debt used in a company's capital structure
flotation costs costs involved in the issuing and placing of new securities
interest tax shield the reduction in taxes paid because interest payments on debt are a tax-deductible

    expense; calculated as the corporate tax rate multiplied by interest payments
levered equity equity in a firm that has debt outstanding
net debt a company's total debt minus any cash or risk-free assets the company holds
preferred stock equity capital that has a fixed dividend; preferred shareholders fall in between debt holders

    and common stockholders in the order of claimants
trade-off theory a theory stating that the total value of a levered company is the value of the firm without

    leverage plus the value of the interest tax shield less financial distress costs
unlevered equity equity in a firm that has no debt outstanding
weighted average cost of capital (WACC) the average of a firm's debt and equity costs of capital, weighted

    by the fractions of the firm's value that correspond to debt and equity

     CFA Institute

This chapter supports some of the Learning Outcome Statements (LOS) in this CFA® Level I Study Session
(https://openstax.org/r/CFA-Level-I-Study). Reference with permission of CFA Institute.

     Multiple Choice

 1. Sandage Auto Parts has debt outstanding with a market value of $2 million. The company's common stock
     has a book value of $3 million and a market value of $8 million. What weight is equity in Sandage's capital
     structure?
      a. 11%
      b. 20%
       c. 60%
      d. 80%

 2. The capital structure of a company refers to ________.
      a. whether the company purchases assets or liabilities with its equity
      b. the proportion of debt and equity the company uses in financing is assets
       c. the ability of the company to use its assets to generate equity for the owners
      d. whether the company uses short-term assets or long-term assets to create its product

 3. Which of the following should be used when calculating the weights for a company's capital structure?
      a. Book values
      b. Current market values
       c. Historic accounting values
      d. Par and face values

 4. Two methods for estimating a company's cost of common stock capital are ________.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                      17 · Multiple Choice 531

      a. the historic method and the current method
      b. the weighted valuation model and the beta model
       c. the constant dividend growth model and the CAPM
      d. the balance sheet method and the face value method

 5. Which of the following would be the most reasonable approach to calculating the cost of debt for a
     company?
      a. Using the coupon rate on the company's existing bonds
      b. Using the interest amount reported on the income statement
       c. Using the yield to maturity on the company's existing bonds
      d. Multiplying the amount of debt on the company's balance sheet by the risk-free rate

 6. Net debt equals ________.
      a. Debt/Equity
      b. Debt × (1 - Tax Rate)
       c. total debt minus the cash and risk-free assets the company owns
      d. the yield to maturity of a company's bonds divided by the tax rate

 7. Unlevered equity refers to ________.
      a. the equity in a firm with no debt
      b. a firm's equity minus the firm's debt
       c. the equity in a firm in the absence of taxation and transaction costs
      d. the portion of a firm's capital structure that is financed by its owners

 8. In perfect capital markets, ________.
      a. a company's WACC does not change as it changes its capital structure
      b. a company can lower its WACC by using more debt in its capital structure
       c. a company can lower its WACC by using more equity in its capital structure
      d. a company's cost of debt capital is exactly equal to its cost of equity capital when the company uses
           50% debt and 50% equity in its capital structure

 9. The interest tax shield occurs because ________.
      a. interest payments are a tax-deductible expense
      b. interest payments are made from after-tax income
       c. investors require a lower rate of return the higher the company's tax rate
      d. investors require a lower rate of return the more debt the company incurs

10. As a company increases the weight of debt in its capital structure, ________.
       a. its cost of debt capital falls
      b. the weight of equity capital also increases
       c. the value of the interest tax shield decreases
      d. its possibility of financial distress increases

11. A company is said to be in financial distress if ________.
       a. it is not fully exploiting the interest tax shield
      b. it needs to raise capital to finance a new project
       c. it has difficulty meeting its debt obligations
      d. its cost of equity capital exceeds its cost of debt capital

12. Issuing new stock ________.
532 17 · Review Questions

       a. costs the same as retaining earnings
      b. will not impact a company's WACC
       c. is the most expensive source of capital because of flotation costs
      d. is the cheapest source of capital because dividends do not have to be paid each year

13. If a bond with a face value of $1,000 has a conversion ratio of 10 shares, the conversion price is ________.
       a. $0.01
      b. $10
       c. $100
      d. $1,000

     Review Questions

 1. Why does a company's capital have a cost?
 2. Why is the rate that debt holders require to entice them to lend money to a company different from the

     company's effective cost of debt capital?
 3. Assume that the corporate tax rate is 21%. Congress is discussing increasing the corporate tax rate to 32%.

     How might this change the capital structures that companies choose?
 4. Describe the order of claimants and how it impacts the returns that various providers of capital require to

     entice them to provide funding to a company.
 5. Explain what is meant by trade-off theory.

     Problems

 1. SodaFizz has debt outstanding that has a market value of $3 million. The company's stock has a book
     value of $2 million and a market value of $6 million. What are the weights in SodaFizz's capital structure?

 2. The yield to maturity on SodaFizz's debt is 7.2%. If the company's marginal tax rate is 21%, what is
     SodaFizz's effective cost of debt?

 3. SodaFizz paid a dividend of $2 per share last year; its dividend has been growing at a rate of 2% per year,
     and that growth rate is expected to continue into the future. The stock of SodaFizz is currently trading at
     $19.50 per share. According to the constant dividend growth model, what is the cost of equity capital for
     SodaFizz?

 4. SodaFizz has a beta of 1.1. If the risk-free rate is 3% and the market risk premium is 11%, what is the cost
     of equity capital for SodaFizz according to the capital asset pricing model?

 5. Given the answers to Problems 1, 2, and 3, what is SodaFizz's WACC when the constant dividend growth
     model is used to calculate its equity cost of capital?

 6. Given the answers to Problems 1, 2, and 4, what is SodaFizz's WACC when the CAPM is used to calculate
     SodaFizz's equity cost of capital?

 7. Shirley Manufacturing paid $1 million in interest payments last year. The company is in the 21% tax
     bracket and has $15 million in debt outstanding. How much was the company's interest tax shield last
     year?

 8. King Medical Supplies has issued preferred stock that pays a yearly dividend of $4 per share. This
     preferred stock is trading at a price of $47 per share. What is King's cost of preferred stock capital?

 9. McPherson Pharmaceutical has common stock that is trading for $75 per share. The company paid a

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         17 · Video Activity 533

     dividend of $5.25 last year. This dividend is expected to increase at a rate of 3% per year. What is the cost
     of equity capital for McPherson? If McPherson issues new shares with a flotation cost of $2 per share,
     what is the company's cost of new equity?

     Video Activity

Calculating the Weighted Average Cost of Capital
Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/WACC)
 1. What is the formula for calculating WACC? What do each of the components of this formula represent?
 2. In the video, the tax rate for Brick and Mortar Co. was 30%. What would your calculation of the company's

     WACC be if there was a change in the tax code and the tax rate for Brick and Mortar Co. fell to 15%? Why
     does the tax rate impact a firm's WACC? Do you think the managers of Brick and Mortar Co. should
     consider making any changes to its capital structure if the tax rate falls to 15%? Why or why not?
Capital Structure for Real Estate Companies
Click to view video content (https://openstax.org/r/optimal-capital)
 3. Why doesn't one optimal capital structure exist for commercial real estate businesses?
 4. How do you think a family that runs a multigenerational commercial real estate business will think about
     risk compared to a young entrepreneur who is beginning to build a commercial real estate business? How
     do you think the capital structures of these two entities are likely to compare? How would those capital
     structures likely be linked to the risk profiles of the two companies?
534 17 · Video Activity
Access for free at openstax.org
18 · Why It Matters                                                                                                             535

18
              Financial Forecasting

Figure 18.1 Forecasts are an important financial tool. (credit: modification of "Red Post-It Label, Calculator and Ballpen" by
photosteve101/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline

  18.1 The Importance of Forecasting
  18.2 Forecasting Sales
  18.3 Pro Forma Financials
  18.4 Generating the Complete Forecast
  18.5 Forecasting Cash Flow and Assessing the Value of Growth
  18.6 Using Excel to Create the Long-Term Forecast

      Why It Matters

Though no one in business has a crystal ball, managers must often do all they can to predict the future as
accurately as possible. This is called forecasting. Accounting and finance professionals use past performance
along with what they know about the business, its competitors, the economy, and the company's plans for the
future to assemble detailed financial forecasts. Forecasts are useful to many individuals for different reasons.
A budget, a type of static forecast, helps accountants and managers see how their plans for the coming year
can be achieved. It outlines sales targets and how much can be spent on cost of goods sold and expenses to
achieve the company's bottom-line (net income) targets. Investors use financial forecasts to help guide their
decisions to buy, sell or hold stocks or to estimate future potential income through dividends. Perhaps most
importantly, for our purposes in finance, forecasts are used to help predict and manage cash flows.

A business can have all the profit in the world at the end of the year, but if it doesn't raise enough cash
(liquidity) to pay the bills and pay its employees halfway through the year, it could still go bankrupt despite
being profitable. Forecasting sales and expenses helps assemble a cash forecast--when sales will be collected
and when expenses will be paid--so that financial managers can look forward far enough to have enough time
to react accordingly and secure short- or long-term financing to meet gaps in cash flow.
536 18 · Financial Forecasting

      18.1 The Importance of Forecasting

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Discuss how to use financial statements in forecasting firm financials.
         · Explain why balance sheet items are important in forecasting a firm's financial result.
         · Explain why income statement items are important in forecasting a firm's financial result.

       In this section, we will briefly review some of the basic elements of financial statements and how we can
       analyze historical statements to help assemble financial forecasts. Financial forecasting is important to short-
       and long-term firm success. It helps a firm plan for the resources it will need, ensuring it will have enough cash
       on hand at the right time to cover daily operations and capital expenditures. It helps the firm communicate its
       future potential and manage its shareholders' expectations. It also helps management assess future risk and
       set plans in place to mitigate that risk.

       Financial forecasting involves using historical data, analysis tools, and other information we can gather to
       make an educated guess about the future financial performance of the firm. Historical figures provide a
       reasonable starting point. We use tools such as ratios, common size, and trend analysis to fine-tune our
       forecast. And finally, we assess what we know about the firm, its competitors, the economy, and anything else
       that might impact performance and further fine-tune our forecast from there.

       It's important to take a moment to consider the role of ethics in forecasting. Ethics is a huge issue in the world
       of accounting and finance in general, and forecasting is no different. There can be tremendous pressure on
       management to perform, to deliver certain levels of profit, and to meet shareholder expectations.

       Forecasting, as you will learn throughout this chapter, is not an exact science. There is a great deal of
       subjectivity that can come into play when forecasting sales and expenses. Ethical behavior is crucial in this
       area. Those who create forecasts must have a firm understanding of where their data comes from, how
       reliable it is, and whether or not their assumptions and projections are reasonably justified.

      Financial Statement Foundations

       In Financial Statements, you were introduced to a firm called Clear Lake Sporting Goods. You learned about
       the four key financial statements: the income statement, balance sheet, statement of stockholders'
       equity, and statement of cash flows. Each one provides a different view of the firm's financial health and
       performance.

       Clear Lake Sporting Goods is a small merchandising company (a company that buys finished goods and sells
       them to consumers) that sells hunting and fishing gear. It uses financial statements to understand its
       profitability and current financial position, to manage cash flow, and to communicate its finances to outside
       parties such as investors, governing bodies, and lenders. We will use Clear Lake's company information and
       historical financial statements in this chapter as we explore its forecasting process. It's important to note that
       in this chapter, we are focusing on just one firm and the one method its managers have chosen to forecast
       financial performance. There are a variety of types of firms in actual application, and they may choose to
       forecast their financial performance differently. We are demonstrating just one approach here.

       The balance sheet shows all the firm's assets, liabilities, and equity at one point in time. It also supports the
       accounting equation in a very clear and transparent way. We find one section of the balance sheet contains all
       current and noncurrent assets that must total the other section of the balance sheet: total liabilities and
       equity. In Figure 18.2, we see that Clear Lake Sporting Goods has total assets of $250,000 in the current year,
       which balances with its total liabilities and equity of $250,000.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                      18.1 · The Importance of Forecasting 537

                                                                          Figure 18.2 Balance Sheet

The income statement reflects the performance of the firm over a period of time. It includes net sales, cost of
goods sold, operating expenses, and net income. In Figure 18.3, we see that Clear Lake had $120,000 in net
sales, $60,000 in cost of goods sold, and $35,000 in net income in the current year.

                                                                    Figure 18.3 Full Income Statement

Finally, the statement of cash flows is used to reconcile net income to cash balances. The statement begins
with net income, then reflects adjustments to balance sheet accounts and noncash expenses. The statement of
538 18 · Financial Forecasting

       cash flows is broken down into three key categories: operating, investing, and financing. This allows users to
       clearly see what elements of the business are generating or using cash. In Figure 18.4, we see that Clear Lake
       had cash flow from operating activities of $53,600, cash used for investing activities of ($18,600), and cash
       used for financing activities of ($15,000).

                                                                           Figure 18.4 Statement of Cash Flows

       Another key concept to remember about the financial statements is that the statement of cash flows is
       necessary to truly understand how the firm is using and generating cash. A common misconception is that if a
       firm reports net income on its income statement, then it must have plenty of cash, and if it reports a loss, it
       must be short on cash. Although this can be true, it's not necessarily the case. Historically speaking, we need
       the statement of cash flows to get the full picture of how cash was used or generated in the past. Looking to
       the future, we need a cash flow forecast to plan for possible gaps in cash flow and, potentially, how to make
       the best use of any cash surplus. Throughout this chapter, we will see how to use historical financial
       statements to help develop the future cash forecast.
       It's also important to remember that the four financial statements are tied together. Net income from the
       income statement feeds into retained earnings, which live on the balance sheet. Equity balances on the
       balance sheet feed information to the statement of stockholders' equity. And information from both the
       income statement (net income and noncash expenses) and the balance sheet (changes in working capital
       accounts) all feed into the statement of cash flows. These relationships will be helpful to understand when
       using historical statements and preparing forecasts.

      Balance Sheet Analysis

       Fully understanding the items that are on the balance sheet and how they relate to one another and to other
       financial statements will help you create a financial forecast. In Financial Statements, you learned that on the
       classified balance sheet, both assets and liabilities are broken down into current and noncurrent categories.
       You also know that the balance sheet must live up to its name--it must balance. This means that total assets
       (what the company owns) must equal total liabilities and equity (what the company owes).

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                      18.1 · The Importance of Forecasting 539

You continued your financial statement development in Measures of Financial Health, where you saw how to
use elements of the balance sheet to assess financial health. Ratios based on balance sheet accounts can be
useful for understanding relationships between balance sheet items--how they related in the past and then, in
forecasting, how those relationships might change or remain the same in the future. Examples of balance
sheet ratios include the current ratio, quick ratio, cash ratio, debt-to-assets ratio, and debt-to-equity ratio.

In Financial Statements, you also explored common-size analysis. To prepare a common-size analysis of the
balance sheet, every item on the statement must be expressed as a percentage of total assets. Seeing each
item as a percentage--that is, seeing its relationship to total assets--is also helpful for assessing historical
statements and how those percentages or relationships can be used to predict future balances in the forecast.
For example, in Figure 18.5, you can see that Clear Lake's current assets represented 80% of its total assets in
both the current and prior years.

                           Figure 18.5 Common-Size Balance Sheet

Income Statement Analysis

Like balance sheet analysis, income statement analysis is also quite helpful in preparing for the forecasting
process. In Financial Statements, you learned that the income statement is commonly broken down into a few
sections. Cost of goods sold is deducted from net sales to arrive at gross margin. Gross margin refers to the
profits earned solely on the sale of the product itself, without consideration for the expenses incurred to run
the business. Next, operating expenses are deducted to reflect operating income. Operating income reflects
the profits of the core business function. Finally, other items, such as interest expense, tax expense, and other
gains and losses, are deducted to arrive at net income, a.k.a. the bottom line. Each segment of the income
statement is helpful for assessing past performance and estimating future expenses for a forecast.

You continued your financial statement development in Measures of Financial Health, where you saw how to
540 18 · Financial Forecasting

       use elements of the income statement to assess historical financial performance. Ratios based on the income
       statement can be useful for understanding relationships between net sales and expenses--how they related in
       the past and then, in forecasting, how those relationships might change or remain the same. Examples of
       income statement ratios include gross margin, operating margin, and profit margin. Common ratios that
       incorporate items from both the balance sheet and the income statement include return on assets (ROA),
       return on equity (ROE), inventory turnover, accounts receivable turnover, and accounts payable turnover.

       LINK TO LEARNING
       Performance Trends

         Review the most recent annual report for Big 5 Sporting Goods (https://openstax.org/r/
         annual_report_for_Big_5_Sporting-Goods). Review the company's sales and gross margins for the current
         and past two years. How is their performance? Are their sales trending up or down? Why might the
         contribution margin have increased or decreased?
       In Financial Statements, you also explored common-size analysis. To prepare a common-size analysis of the
       income statement, every item on the statement must be expressed as a percentage of net assets. Seeing each
       item as a percentage, in terms of its relationship to total sales, is also helpful for assessing historical
       statements and how those percentages or relationships can be used to predict future balances in the forecast.
       For example, in Figure 18.6, you can see that Clear Lake's cost of goods sold represented 50% of its net sales in
       both the current and prior years.

                                                                     Figure 18.6 Common-Size Income Statement

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          18.2 · Forecasting Sales 541

 18.2 Forecasting Sales

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Explain how sales are the main driver for a financial forecast.
  · Determine a past time period to formulate the basis for a financial forecast.
  · Explain the advantages and disadvantages of using past data to forecast future financial performance.
  · Calculate past sales growth averages.
  · Justify adjusting relationships when forecasting future financial performance.

In this section of the chapter, you will begin to explore the first step of creating a forecast: forecasting sales.
We will discuss common time frames for sales forecasts and why we use historical data in our forecasts (but
only with caution), and we will work through the process of forecasting future sales. We will be using the
percent-of-sales method to forecast some expenses for Clear Lake Sporting Goods, the example used
throughout the chapter. This method relies on sales data, further highlighting why accuracy in forecasting
sales is crucial.

Sales as the Driver

A significant portion of a business's costs are driven by how much it sells. Thus, the sales forecast is the
necessary first step in preparing a financial forecast. Common costs driven by sales include direct product
costs, direct labor costs, and other key variable costs (i.e., costs that vary proportionately to sales), such as
sales commissions.

Looking to the Past

Forecasting sales is not always an easy task, as no one knows the future. We can, however, use the information
we do have to forecast future sales with the greatest accuracy possible. Most firms start by looking at the past.
A firm may look at past sales from a variety of prior periods. It's common to look at the past 12 months to
estimate the coming 12 months. Looking at 12 consecutive months helps identify seasonality of sales trends,
what time of year sales tend to drop off and when they increase, possible sales spikes that might reoccur, and
any other trends that tend to appear over a 12-month period. In Figure 18.7, we see Clear Lake's sales by
month for the past 12 months.

Past data is often used in conjunction with probabilities and weighted average calculations derived from
probabilities. Though used in several areas of forecasting, this approach is particularly common in drafting the
sales forecast. Using multiple scenarios and the probability of each scenario occurring is a common approach
to estimating future sales.

                                                                     Figure 18.7 Historical Sales Data

We can see at first glance that sales remain fairly steady from January to April. Sales then goes up significantly
in April and May, seem to peak in June, taper off a bit in July, then decline steeply from August to the end of the
year, with the lowest sales being in November and December. Though not exact, it's easy to quickly see that
sales follow a seasonal pattern. We will focus on just one year of data here to keep things simple. However, it's
important to note that when a firm has a seasonal sales pattern, it normally uses more than one year of data
to detect and evaluate the pattern. It's not uncommon for firms to have a seasonal sales pattern that
fluctuates based on an external factor such as weather patterns, patterns in business or demand, or other
542 18 · Financial Forecasting

factors such as holidays. Common examples might include farm-based businesses that function on a weather
pattern for harvesting and selling crops or a toy company that fluctuates around gift-giving holidays.

This knowledge is helpful when assembling a first pass at the next year's sales forecast. Using common-size
and horizontal (trend) analyses on sales is also helpful, as shown in Figure 18.8. We can see the exact
percentages that sales went up or down each month:

· In January, the company had sales of $9,000, which was       of the total annual sales.
· In June, the company had $19,000 sales, which was       of the total annual sales and

                                     of January sales.

                                                          Figure 18.8 Historical Sales Data as Percentages

Once a baseline in the 12-month period is assessed, it can also be helpful to look for trends in other ways. For
example, the past several years might be assessed to see if there is a trend in total growth or decline for those
years on a summary basis or by period. Clear Lake Sporting Goods had sales in the current year of $126,000, in
the prior year of $105,000, and two years ago of $89,000. This reflects a 20% increase and an 18% increase,
respectively. It might be reasonable to expect a roughly 18 to 20% increase in total sales in the future with only
this information in mind. Keep in mind that we will learn about many other factors to consider in the forecast,
so the 18 to 20% increase is a good general guideline to consider along with other factors.

 THINK IT THROUGH

 Sales Forecast for Big 5 Sporting Goods

  Review the 2020 annual report for Big 5 Sporting Goods (https://openstax.org/r/
  2020_annual_report_for_Big_5_Sporting_Goods). Locate the consolidated statements of operations on page
  F-7. Using the company's net sales figures for the current and prior years, what percentage might you
  recommend for their sales forecast for the next year?

  Solution:

  Big 5's sales for 2020 and 2019 were $1,041,212,000 and $996,495,000, respectively. This represents a 4.5%
  growth from the prior year. Forecasted sales, based solely on this information, might be appropriate at
  4.5% growth for the next year, keeping in mind that many other factors should also be considered along
  with this information. Historical sales are only one set of data to use as a starting point.

Looking at Figure 18.9, assume that Clear Lake Sporting Goods decides to take its first pass at a forecast using
the more conservative estimate of 18% total sales growth. The company could consider last year's sales of
$126,000 and increase them by 18% to arrive at total forecasted sales for next year of

                                         . Next, to get the monthly sales, the company could use the same percent of the
total for each month that it did for the previous year. For example, sales in January of last year were 7.1% of
the full year's sales. To find the forecast for the next year, the company would take the forecasted sales of
$148,680 for the year and multiply that by 7.1% to get $10,620 for January. The process is repeated for each

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              18.2 · Forecasting Sales 543

month to get the full year.

                                           Figure 18.9 Forecasted Sales Data

Keep in mind that this is only a starting point. These estimates will be reviewed, assessed, and updated as
more information and other factors are taken into consideration.

It can also be helpful to look at a shorter period, perhaps just the last few months, on a more detailed basis (by

department, by customer, etc.) to see if there are any possible new trends beginning to develop that might be

an indicator of performance in the coming year. For example, Clear Lake Sporting Goods might look at

detailed sales records for October, November, and December and see that it had an old product line that was

discontinued in early October, which contributed to a 2% reduction in monthly sales. This reduction in monthly

sales will likely continue into the new year until the new line the company has signed on begins arriving in

stores. Thus, the management team feels they should reduce their first quarter monthly estimates by 2%, as

reflected in Figure 18.10. January is now  , for example.

                                                            Figure 18.10 Adjusted Forecasted Sales Data

Changes for the Future

It's important to note that the past is not always a reliable predictor of the future. Circumstances can often
change to make the future quite different from the past. The business itself may change, the economy can
change, the customer base may undergo a shift in demographics or a change in buying habits, new
competition may emerge, and so on. So while past performance is helpful, it is only one step in the process of
forecasting sales.

 LINK TO LEARNING

 Big 5 Sporting Goods MD&A Report

  Review the most recent annual report for Big 5 Sporting Goods (https://openstax.org/r/
  annual_report_for_Big_5_Sporting_Goods). Review the management's discussion and analysis (MD&A)
  report (Item 7). What information does the report share about the firm, the economy, and other factors
  that might be useful for forecasting sales growth for next year?

Most firms first look to the past to target some form of baseline estimate for the coming year; then, managers
begin making adjustments based on what they know about the future. Assume that Clear Lake Sporting Goods
will be adding a new brand to its collection of fishing supplies in March. The manufacturer plans to begin
running its commercials in late February, which managers anticipate will increase Clear Lake's monthly sales
544 18 · Financial Forecasting

       by about $500 in March, $1,000 in April, $1,400 in May, and $2,000 per month in June, July, and August. We see
       the monthly adjustments to Clear Lake's latest sales forecast in Figure 18.11. March, for example, is now
       $10,908 ($10,408 prior estimate plus $500 increase from new brand).

                                                                Figure 18.11 Forecasted Sales Data with New Brand

       What we have discussed here are only some brief examples of the myriad factors that might impact a sales
       budget for the coming year. It's critical that all members of the team take the time and effort to research their
       customers and the factors that impact their business in order to effectively assess the impact of these factors
       on future sales. Though only two adjustments were made here, it's likely that a large firm would have to
       consider many, many factors that would ultimately impact monthly sales figures before arriving at a
       conclusion.

      18.3 Pro Forma Financials

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Define pro forma in the context of a financial forecast.
         · Describe the factors that impact the length of a financial forecast.
         · Explain the risks associated with a financial forecast.

       In this section of the chapter, we will move beyond the sales forecast and look at the general nature, length,
       and timeline of forecasts and the risks associated with using them. We'll look at why we use them, how long
       they generally are, what the key variables in a forecast are, and how we pair those variables with common-size
       analysis to develop the forecast.

      Purpose of a Forecast

       As mentioned earlier in the chapter, forecasts serve different purposes depending on who is using them. Our
       focus here, however, is the world of finance. In this realm, the key purpose of pro forma (future-looking)
       financial statements is to manage a firm's cash flow and assess the overall value that the firm is generating
       through future sales growth. Growing just for the sake of growing doesn't always yield favorable income for
       the firm. A larger top-line sales figure that results in lower net income doesn't make sense in the grand
       scheme of things. The same is true of profitable sales that don't generate enough cash flows at the right time.
       The firm may make a profit, but if it doesn't manage the timing of its cash flows, it could be forced to shut
       down if it can't cover the costs of payroll or keep the lights on. Forecasting helps assess both cash flow and the
       profitability of future growth. Managers can forecast cash flow using data from forecasted financial
       statements; this allows them to identify potential gaps in cash and plan ahead in order to either alter collection
       and payment policies or obtain funding to cover the gap in the timing of cash flows.

       LINK TO LEARNING

       Pro Forma Financial Statements

         Review the video Business Plan and Pro-Forma Financial Statements (https://openstax.org/r/
         Business_Plan_and_Pro-Forma_Financial_Statements) to learn about the basics of pro forma financial
         statements and why they are helpful.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                    18.3 · Pro Forma Financials 545

Length of a Forecast

Forecasts can generally be for any length of time. The length generally depends on the user's needs. A one-
year forecast, broken down by month, is quite typical. A firm will often go through a formal budgeting process
near the end of its calendar or fiscal year to project financial plans and goals for the coming year. Once that is
done, a rolling financial forecast is then done monthly to adjust as time moves on, more information becomes
available, and circumstances change.

To be useful, the future forecast for financial planning purposes is almost always calculated as monthly
increments rather than one total figure for the next 12 months. Breaking the data down by month allows
finance managers to more clearly see fluctuations in cash flows in and out, identify potential gaps in cash flow,
and plan ahead for their cash needs.

Forecasts can also be done for several years into the future. In fact, they commonly are. However, once the
firm is looking out beyond 12 months, it gets difficult to forecast items with a great degree of accuracy. Often,
forecasts beyond a year will be completed only to quarterly or even annual figures rather than monthly.
Forecasts that far into the future are often strategic in nature, made more to communicate future plans for the
firm than for more detailed decision-making and cash flow planning.

Common-Size Financials

As we saw earlier in the chapter, common-size analysis involves using historical financial statements as a basis
for future forecasts. Financial statements provide a great starting point for analysis, as we can see the
relationships between sales and costs on the income statement and the relationships between total assets and
line items on the balance sheet.

For example, in Figure 18.6, we saw that for the past two years, cost of goods sold has been 50% of sales. Thus,
in the first draft of a forecast for Clear Lake, it's likely that managers would estimate cost of goods sold at 50%
of their forecasted sales. We can begin to see why forecasting sales first is crucial and why doing so as
accurately as possible is also important.

Select Variables to Use

A simple way to begin a full financial statement forecast might be to simply use the common-size statements
and forecast every item using historical percentages. It's a logical way to begin a very rough draft of the
forecast. However, several variables should be taken into consideration. First, managers must address the cost
of an account and determine if it's a variable or fixed item. Variable costs tend to vary directly and
proportionally with production or sales volume. Common examples include direct labor and direct materials.
Fixed costs, on the other hand, do not change when production or sales volume increases or decreases within
the relevant range. Granted, if production were to increase or decrease by a large amount, fixed costs would
indeed change. However, in normal month-to-month changes, fixed costs often remain the same. Common
examples of fixed costs include rent and managerial salaries.

So, if we were to approach our common-size income statement, for example, we would likely use the
percentage of sales as a starting point to forecast variable items such as cost of goods sold. However, fixed
costs may not be accurately forecast as a percentage of sales because they won't actually change with sales.
Thus, we would likely look at the history of the dollar values of fixed costs in order to forecast them.

 CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

 COVID-19 Makes Forecasting Difficult for Big 5 Sporting Goods

  Big 5 Sporting Goods announced record earnings in the third quarter of 2020, attributing its huge success
  that quarter to the impact of people's reactions to the COVID-19 pandemic. With so many people in
546 18 · Financial Forecasting

         quarantine still wanting to make healthy lifestyle choices, sporting goods stores were making record sales.
         Record-breaking sales, however, are not certain in the future. The impacts of the pandemic are extremely
         difficult to predict, making it a challenge for Big 5 Sporting Goods and other companies to assemble pro
         forma financial statements.

         (sources: https://www.globenewswire.com/news-release/2020/10/27/2115470/0/en/Big-5-Sporting-Goods-
         Corporation-Announces-Record-Fiscal-2020-Third-Quarter-Results.html; https://finance.yahoo.com/news/
         investors-want-big-5-sporting-054658521.html; https://www.cpapracticeadvisor.com/accounting-audit/
         news/21206691/four-ways-covid19-will-impact-2021-financial-forecasting-and-planning)

      Determine Potential Changes in Variables

       So far, we have focused on using historical common-size statements to create a draft (not a final version) of
       the forecast. This is because the past isn't always a perfect indicator of the future, and our finances don't
       always follow a linear pattern. We use the past as a good starting point; then, we must assess what else we
       know to fine-tune and make adjustments to the forecast.

       Many items impact the forecast, and they will vary from one organization to another. The key is to do research,
       gather data, and look around at the market, the economy, the competition, and any other factors that have the
       potential to impact the future sales, costs, and financial health of the company. Though certainly not an
       exhaustive list, here are a few examples of items that may impact Clear Lake Sporting Goods.

         · It has an old product line that was discontinued in early October, contributing to a 2% reduction in
             monthly sales that will likely continue into the new year until a new line begins arriving in stores.

         · It will be adding a new brand to its collection of fishing supplies in March. The manufacturer plans to
             begin running commercials in late February. Managers anticipate that this will increase Clear Lake's
             monthly sales by about $500 in March, $1,000 in April, $1,400 in May, and $2,000 per month in June, July,
             and August.

         · The company has just finished updating its employee compensation package. It goes into effect in January
             of the new year and will result in an overall 4% increase in the cost of labor.

         · The landlord indicated that rent will increase by $50 per month starting July 1.
         · Some fixed assets will be fully depreciated by the end of March. Thus, depreciation expense will go down

             by $25 per month beginning in April.
         · There are rumors of new regulations that will impact the costs of importing some of the more difficult-to-

             obtain hunting supplies. Managers aren't entirely sure of the full impact of the new legislation at this time,
             but they anticipate that it could increase cost of goods sold for the affected product line when the new
             legislation goes into effect in the last quarter. Their best estimate is that it could increase the overall cost
             of goods sold by up to 2%.

       We will use all of this data later in the chapter when we are ready to compile a complete forecast for Clear
       Lake.

      18.4 Generating the Complete Forecast

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Generate a forecasted income statement that incorporates pertinent sales, functional, and policy
             variables.
         · Generate a forecasted balance sheet.
         · Connect the balance sheet and income statement forecasts with appropriate feedback linkages.

       In this section of the chapter, we will tie together what we have learned so far about forecasting sales,

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                18.4 · Generating the Complete Forecast 547

common-size analysis, and using what we know about the company and its environment to create a full set of
pro forma (forward-looking or forecasted) financial statements.

Forecast the Income Statement

To arrive at a fully forecasted income statement, we use historical income statements, common-size income
statements, and any additional information we have about future sales and costs, such as the effects of the
economy and competition. As we saw earlier in the chapter, we begin with forecasted sales because they are
the basis for many of the forecasted costs.
Let's begin with the sales forecast for Clear Lake Sporting Goods that we saw earlier in the chapter, in Figure
18.9, and use it along with the prior year income statement by month shown in Figure 18.12. We will consider
other data we have about the business to begin creating a full income statement (see Figure 18.13).

                                                Figure 18.12 Prior Year Monthly Income Statement by Month

The first two key points regarding product lines have already been built into the sales forecast. Notice that the
cost of goods sold was 50% in the prior year. However, based on possible future legislation, to be conservative,
we should increase the cost of goods sold by 2% in the last quarter of the year. Thus, we will forecast cost of
goods sold at 50% of sales in the first nine months and increase it to 52% in the last three months of the year.
Rent is a fixed cost that historically amounts to $458 per month. However, we know that the landlord is
increasing rent by $50 starting on July 1. Thus, we will forecast rent at the same fixed cost of $458 per month
for the first six months and increase it to $508 per month for the second half of the year.
Depreciation, also a fixed cost, was historically $300 per month. However, we know that depreciation expense
will go down by $25 beginning in April. Thus, we forecast depreciation at $300 for the first three months and at
$275 for the last 9 months.
Salaries expense has historically been $450 per month. However, we know that the company is implementing a
new compensation program on January 1 that will increase salaries expense by 4% ($18). Thus, we will forecast
salaries for the whole year at $468.
Utilities expense seems to vary somewhat by sales from month to month, as shops are open longer hours
during their busy season. However, the total utilities expense is not expected to change for the coming year.
Thus, the forecast for utilities expense remains at $2,500, broken down by month as a percentage of sales.
Interest expense is a fixed cost and isn't anticipated to change. Thus, the same $167 interest expense per
month is forecast for the coming year.
548 18 · Financial Forecasting

       Finally, income tax expense is forecasted as a percentage of operating income because tax liability is incurred
       as a direct result of operating income. Figure 18.13 shows the next 12 months' forecast for Clear Lake Sporting
       Goods using all of this data.

                                                                      Figure 18.13 Forecasted Income Statement

      Forecast the Balance Sheet

       Now that we have a reasonable income statement forecast, we can move on to the balance sheet. The balance
       sheet, however, is entirely different from the income statement. It requires a bit more research and additional
       assumptions. Just like the income statement, it's often a work in progress. A first draft is a good starting point,
       but adjustments must be made once it is created, and all the interrelationships between the statements, cash
       flow in particular, are taken into consideration.
       The balance sheet is a bit more difficult to forecast because the statement reflects balances at just a given
       point in time. Account balances change daily, so forecasting just one snapshot in time for each month can be a
       challenge. A good starting point is to assess general company financial policies or rules of thumb. For
       example, assume that Clear Lake pays most of its vendors on net 30-day terms. A good way to forecast
       accounts payable on the balance sheet might be to add up the cost of goods sold from the forecasted income
       statement for the prior month. For example, in Figure 18.14, we see that Clear Lake has forecasted its accounts
       payable for March as the cost of goods sold in March from its forecasted income statement.
       For accounts receivable, Clear Lake generally receives payment from customers within net 90-day terms. Thus,
       it uses the sum of the current and prior two months' forecasted sales to estimate its accounts receivable
       balance.
       Inventory will vary throughout the year. For the first six months, the company tries to build inventory for four
       months of sales. Once the busy season hits, inventory goes down to three months' worth of future sales, then
       finally drops to only two months of sales in December. Thus, managers use their sales forecast by month to
       estimate their inventory ending balance each month.
       The equipment balance is forecasted by reducing the prior month's balance by the forecasted depreciation
       expense on the forecasted income statement.
       Unearned revenue is historically around 50% of the current month's sales. Thus, Clear Lake estimates its
       unearned revenue balance each month by taking the current month's net sales from the forecasted income
       statement and multiplying it by 50%.
       Short-term investments, notes payable, and common stock are not anticipated to change, so the current
       balance is forecasted to remain the same for the next 12 months.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                18.4 · Generating the Complete Forecast 549

To forecast the ending balance for retained earnings for each month, managers add the monthly net income
from the forecasted balance sheet to the prior balance and subtract a quarterly $10,000 dividend.
Once all of these accounts are completed, the balance sheet is out of balance. Given that all of these events
are somewhat related but are not tied together dollar for dollar, it's not surprising when the forecasted
balance sheet is finished and does not balance. To complete the first draft (see Figure 18.14), the cash account
is used as a variable and plugged in to make the balance sheet balance. Notice that by the end of the year, the
company has $59,905 in cash. However, look at what happens midyear--the cash account falls to only $8,782.
In the next section, we will generate a cash flow forecast, which will allow Clear Lake to update its balance
sheet forecast once it estimates what it will do to cover the cash flow gaps.

                                                            Figure 18.14 Forecasted Balance Sheet Draft

Linkages between the Forecasted Balance Sheet and the Income Statement

Notice that in the discussion in the prior section on the balance sheet forecast, a lot of the information in the
forecasted income statement was used to generate the forecasted balance sheet. The balance sheet accounts
generally depend on activity reported in the income statement. For example, for many firms, the balance in
their accounts receivable account is tied to their sales. Looking at historical balances in the accounts receivable
account and how those relate to historical sales will help determine how to use the forecasted future sales to
estimate the future balance of accounts receivable.
The same is true of accounts payable. Looking at past balances, past expenses (normally cost of goods sold),
and the firm's payment terms for its vendors allows managers to use forecasted cost of goods sold or other
expenses to estimate the balance in the accounts payable account.
We learned in Financial Statements that net income flows into retained earnings. Thus, the net income from
the forecasted income statement can be used to help estimate the ending balance in retained earnings. If the
firm intends to issue any dividends in the coming year, managers should also estimate that reduction in their
forecast.
It's also common to find other general policies or procedures that help drive performance and aid in
forecasting balances. For example, if the company has a goal of maintaining a certain level of inventory or a
minimum balance in its cash account, that information can be used to guide the estimate for those accounts.
550 18 · Financial Forecasting

      18.5 Forecasting Cash Flow and Assessing the Value of Growth

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Generate a cash flow forecast.
         · Assess a cash flow forecast to determine future cash funding needs.
         · Use pro forma financial statements and cash flow forecasts to assess the value of growth to the firm.

       In this section of the chapter, we will use the forecasted income statement, forecasted balance sheet, and
       other information we know about the firm's policies and goals for the coming year to generate and assess a
       cash flow forecast.

      Create a Cash Flow Forecast

       A cash flow forecast isn't overly complex, yet it is not easy to assemble because it requires making many
       assumptions about the future. A cash forecast begins with the beginning cash balance, adds anticipated cash
       inflows, and deducts anticipated cash outflows. This identifies cash surpluses and shortages.
       For Clear Lake Sporting Goods, for example, we see in Figure 18.15 that the company begins with cash of
       $42,581,000 in January of the new year. Next, it lists the cash inflows, or cash received from customers. Given
       the assumption that customers pay in 90-day terms, the cash flow is filled in by plugging in the sales forecast
       for the three prior months. For example, the cash flow from customers of $10,508 for June is the same as the
       net sales forecast for March (see Figure 18.13).

                                                                           Figure 18.15 Forecasted Cash Inflows

       Next, Clear Lake identifies cash outflows, which include accounts payable, salaries, rent, utilities, dividends,
       and interest payments. Accounts payable are normally paid within 30 days, so the forecast for cost of goods
       sold for the prior month is used as an estimate of amount paid for payables. For example, in Figure 18.16, we
       see that the accounts payable settled in June of $8,610 is the cost of goods sold for May from the forecasted
       income statement.
       Salaries are paid monthly and thus represent the same recurring monthly cash outflow, as does rent. Utilities,
       like accounts payable, are assumed to be paid within 30 days. Thus, the cash outflow for utilities is the utilities
       expense for the prior month from the forecasted income statement.
       Management intends to pay a quarterly dividend of $10,000. Thus, in Figure 18.16, we see $10,000 cash
       outflows forecasted for March, June, September, and December. Interest on the long-term liability is paid
       quarterly. Thus, the $500 cash outflows in March, June, September, and December are simply the monthly
       interest expense of $167 from the income statement, summed for each quarter.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             18.5 · Forecasting Cash Flow and Assessing the Value of Growth 551

                                                       Figure 18.16 Forecasted Cash Inflows and Outflows

Using a Cash Forecast to Determine Additional Funds Needed

Finally, at the end of the cash flow forecast, cash outflows are subtracted from the cash inflows. This identifies
whether a cash surplus (extra) or cash deficit (not enough) exists for each month. For example, in Figure
18.17, we see that in March, Clear Lake is forecasting $4,800 of cash inflows and $17,800 of total cash outflows,
which results in a cash deficit of $13,000.
Clear Lake has a general policy to not let its cash balance fall below $35,000. Thus, managers need to assess
their monthly balances and potential deficits and identify months when financing is necessary. For example,
the deficit of $13,000 in March is enough to push the cash balance lower than $35,000. Thus, it's estimated that
the company will need $5,000 in short-term financing in March. It has an estimated surplus in April, so $3,000
of the borrowing is returned.

                                                          Figure 18.17 Forecasted Cash Surplus or Deficit

Assessing the Value of Growth

It's a fairly common assumption that most, if not all, businesses want to grow. While it certainly can be good
as a firm to grow in size, growth just for the sake of growth isn't necessarily a good goal. A firm can grow in
size based on customers, employees, locations, or simply sales. However, that doesn't mean that the growth
will increase profits. Growth may increase profits, but this is not a safe assumption. Scaling up operations
takes careful planning, which includes monitoring the profitability of the sales and, of course, the cash flow it
552 18 · Financial Forecasting

       would require. Growing a business can require more inventory, more locations, more equipment, and more
       manpower, all of which cost money. Even if the forecasted growth is profitable, it may pose problems from a
       cash flow perspective. It's important that the firm review not only its forecasted income statement and
       balance sheet but also its cash forecast, as this can reveal some serious gaps in funding depending on the
       extent, timing, and nature of the planned growth.
       For example, assume that Clear Lake Sporting Goods intends to run a large-scale ad campaign to boost sales
       in its busy season. Historically, the store relied primarily on its prime location for high volumes of retail foot
       traffic. Managers felt, however, that given the increase in competition, they could boost sales significantly by
       running the ad campaign in the first quarter. The campaign would cost $30,000. Forecasts already reflect a
       cash deficit at the end of the first quarter of $13,000, so the additional $30,000 ad campaign, which would
       require payment up front, would create a much larger need for funding. It's also important that managers
       look at the increased cost of doing business along with the increased cost in advertising to ensure that the
       move would be profitable. Fortunately, Excel or other forecasting software can be used to create a forecast
       with formulas that tie together, making scenario analysis such as this a much easier process.

      Scenarios in Forecasting

       Forecasting is almost never a linear process. In other words, we don't do one forecast and call it good. The first
       draft is completed using historical data, and then changes are made a bit at a time as all potential variables are
       assessed for their impact on the forecast. It's quite common to then use the work-in-progress forecast to
       complete scenario analysis. This is particularly true when the forecast is completed in Excel or other budgeting
       or forecasting software. Elements of the forecast can be changed to see what the overall impact would be to
       the firm. Assuming the forecast is set up using formulas in Excel or other software, a change to one figure or
       one variable would then "ripple" through the forecast to reflect the overall impact.
       Often, a firm may complete an initial forecast (scenario) under the assumption that the economy is in a
       "normal state." The firm can then alter the initial forecast for different scenarios, such as the economy in a
       recession or the economy in a state of expansion. This helps the firm understand different possible future
       states and highlights how changes in the economy such as inflation may cause revenue and expenses to
       increase.
       Assume that Clear Lake's initial forecast is created under the assumption that the economy will remain
       average. Management also wants to know the worst-case scenario. What will their financial results look like if
       the economy were in a recession, for example? If management assumes their sales would drop to only 60% of
       the prior year sales in a recessionary economy, they could alter the formula in Excel driving their sales and
       variable costs, resulting in a new pro forma income statement. In Figure 18.18, we can see that net income
       would drop to $16,391 under this assumption, compared to the net income of $47,653 forecasted under
       average economy assumptions in Figure 18.13.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             18.5 · Forecasting Cash Flow and Assessing the Value of Growth 553

                                                          Figure 18.18 Forecasted Cash Surplus or Deficit

Though creating a full forecast in Excel can be a bit complex, it is a powerful tool that is useful for analysis.
Elements can be used to vary just about anything, from something small such as a 1% increase in the cost of a
product to a company-wide increase in salaries, the introduction of an entire new product line, or the purchase
of a new production machine, among other possibilities.
For example, assume that Clear Lake has completed a first pass at its forecast and is reviewing the forecasted
profit for the next 12 months. Managers feel the profit is currently low, as they always want to target a certain
percentage. They might tinker with variables in the forecast file to see the impact on profits of potential
changes they are considering. They may reduce the new salaries package by a percentage point to see if it
gets them closer to their goal. They may adjust cost of goods sold by a certain percentage if they feel they can
negotiate with vendors to work down their costs. They may adjust rent and see if they can find a better retail
location to either reduce costs or increase sales due to increased foot traffic in a new location. They may save
an entirely new version of the forecast and change it drastically to see what investing in opening a second
retail location would do.
As you can see, the list of possibilities is endless. Though the main goal of financial managers may be cash
planning, the power of a well-developed forecast is tremendous. It can help assess potential growth, new
opportunities, and even small changes in the business as well.

Sensitivity Analysis in Forecasting

Sensitivity analysis will often look at the change in just one variable rather than the entire scenario. It
examines how sensitive a particular output (commonly net income) will be to a change in a particular
underlying input (sales or costs, for example). What if sales are 10% more or less than forecasted? What if the
prices the firm can charge its customers are 10% more or less? What if the cost of goods sold increases by
10%? The purpose is to see which variables are crucial to "get right." It isn't worth spending a lot of research
dollars to make sure you are accurately predicting a variable if that variable won't notably change the
outcome. However, a slight change in other variables may have significant impact.
Using pro forma financial statements created in Excel allows management to quickly generate new pro forma
financials and see the impact that each possible variable might have on the overall financial results.
554 18 · Financial Forecasting

      18.6 Using Excel to Create the Long-Term Forecast

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Generate a financial statement forecast using spreadsheet tools.
         · Connect the balance sheet and income statement using appropriate formula referencing.
         · Use spreadsheet functions to generate appropriate iterations that balance financial forecasts.

       Throughout this chapter, we have seen forecasted financial statements for Clear Lake Sporting Goods along
       with its forecasted cash flow. These statements could all have been generated by hand, of course, but that
       wouldn't be an effective use of time. As mentioned in prior sections, several different types of software can be
       quite effective in making the forecasting process faster and more flexible. In this section, we will review just
       one common option, Microsoft Excel.

                Download the spreadsheet file (https://openstax.org/r/spreadsheet_file) containing key Chapter 18
                Excel exhibits.

      Using the "Sheet"

       Creating a budget in Excel can be very simple or extremely complex, depending on the size and complexity of
       the business and the number of formulas and dependencies that are written into the Excel workbook.
       Creating the forecast in Excel follows the same steps and flow we just explored in this chapter but with the
       power of a software program to do the math for you. We begin with the sales forecast, which uses several key
       formulas in Excel.
        1. First, sales are projected to be 18% higher than the prior year. Thus, a total projection for the year is

             calculated using a simple link and multiplication function tied to last year's total sales. In Figure 18.19, you
             can see the formula in cell O4 is "='Figure 18.12'!N4*1.18". This formula simply does the math to increase
             the prior year's sales by 18%.
        2. Next, the sales are distributed by month. In Figure 18.19, we see in cell B5 that the forecasted income
             statement sheet is linked to the percent of annual sales from the Prior Year Income Statement (Figure
             18.12) sheet. Then, in cell B4, January sales are estimated with a formula that multiplies the total
             forecasted sales in O4 by the percent of annual sales for January of the prior year. Notice that the formula
             then multiplies that product by 0.98. This is because Clear Lake discontinued a product line in the last
             quarter of the prior year, and management feels that this will reduce sales in the first quarter of the new
             year by roughly 2%.

                                                                       Figure 18.19 Forecasted Sales Formulas in Excel

        3. As Clear Lake continues to fill out its forecasted income statement, the next formula we see is a simple
             sum formula to calculate net sales in B8 (see Figure 18.20). It's a simple formula that subtracts sales
             returns and allowances in B7 from gross sales in B4. Similar formulas are also found in B10 for gross
             margin and B18 for net income.

        4. In cell B9, we see a multiplication formula that multiplies sales from B4 by 0.5, or 50%. This is because

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                               18.6 · Using Excel to Create the Long-Term Forecast 555

      management feels that cost of goods sold will remain the same as last year, in most quarters at least, and
      last year's percentage was 50%.
5. Rent, depreciation, and salaries are all simply typed in, as they are fixed expenses that remain the same as
      last year.
6. The utilities calculation, found in cell B14, is somewhat similar to the sales calculation. The total utilities
      expense from O14 is multiplied by the current month's sales in B4 divided by the total annual sales in O4.
      This spreads out the utility cost by month based on the percentage of annual sales.

                                                      Figure 18.20 Forecasted Income Statement Formulas

Clear Lake's forecasted balance sheet ties very closely to both the forecasted income statement and the prior
year's income statement. In Figure 18.21, we see in C7 an addition formula using the sum of the current
month and three months of prior sales as an estimate of the ending accounts receivable balance. The formula
for inventory is similar but forward looking. In C8, inventory is estimated by adding the cost of goods sold for
the current month and next three months from the forecasted income statement.
Total current assets in C10 is calculated with a SUM formula that adds together the values in all the selected
cells. Amounts such as short-term investments and common stock that are not anticipated to change are
simply typed as a number in the cell. Much like in the income statement, subtotals are found in C13 for total
assets, C17 for current liabilities, C24 for total equity, and C25 for total liabilities and equity. Retained earnings
in C23 pulls the ending retained earnings balance from the end of last year (hidden in column B) and adds the
556 18 · Financial Forecasting

       net income for January in the forecasted income statement to get the current month's ending balance.

                                                                  Figure 18.21 Forecasted Balance Sheet Formulas

       Much like the balance sheet, the cash forecast also relies heavily on data from the forecasted income
       statement as well as the forecasted balance sheet. To begin the year, in Figure 18.22, we see that the formula
       in B4 pulls the cash balance from the forecasted balance sheet. In B6, the formula pulls the sales for the three
       months prior from the previous year's income statement. This is because it's assumed that cash is collected
       from customers 90 days after the sale. The same approach is used for accounts payable, rent, salaries, and
       utilities. The formulas pull the expenses from a prior month depending on the assumed timing for payment.
       Utilities, for example, are assumed to be paid within 30 days, so the cash outflow in February is assumed to be
       the utilities expense for January from the forecasted income statement. Note that interest payments are
       assumed to be zero in January and February, but in March, the formula in D14 sums the interest expenses on
       the forecasted income statement for January, February, and March. This is because interest is paid quarterly.
       Finally, note the formula in C4. The beginning cash balance for a given month is the same as the ending cash
       balance from the prior month; thus, the figure in B18 is linked to C4 to start the new month.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                               18.6 · Using Excel to Create the Long-Term Forecast 557

                                                                  Figure 18.22 Cash Forecast Formulas

Using Excel Functions to Balance

Once we get a draft of the forecasts outlined, then the tinkering starts. Additional information can be used to
adjust the formulas, as we saw with the 2% reduction in January sales for the forecasted income statement.
Because we have linked most (though not all) of our expenses, subtotals, and statements together using
formulas, management can also use the forecast workbook to perform scenario and sensitivity analyses,
essentially asking "what if?" and looking at the results. When completed, however, before finalizing the
forecast, it's important that the financial statements are in balance (particularly the balance sheet, just as the
name implies).
Notice that throughout, we used formulas to calculate subtotals to ensure they are correct and change as
needed. We also linked figures, such as the ending and beginning cash balances, to ensure they are in balance.
Perhaps the easiest but most important thing to do is to ensure that the balance sheet balances. We can do
this with a simple formula that compares total assets to total liabilities and equity. We can see in Figure 18.23
that subtracting one from the other in cell C27 should result in $0. If there is a difference, the formula will
highlight it, forcing us to investigate and correct the sheet so that it balances.
558 18 · Financial Forecasting

                                                                      Figure 18.23 Forecasted Balancing Formula
        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                               18 · Summary 559

     Summary

18.1 The Importance of Forecasting

Forecasting financial statements is important to different users for different reasons. In finance, it's most
important for assessing the value of future growth plans and planning for future cash flow needs.

18.2 Forecasting Sales

The sales forecast is the foundation on which much of the rest of the forecast is built. Thus, the sales forecast
is completed first. Historical sales data and any other information on the firm, its products, the economy, its
customers, and its competitors are all used to create the most accurate sales forecast possible.

18.3 Pro Forma Financials

Pro forma financial statements are forward looking in nature. They use the sales forecast, historical data,
financial statement analyses, relationships between accounts and statements, and any other information
known about the firm, the environment, and the future to create the most accurate financial statement
forecast possible.

18.4 Generating the Complete Forecast

Interrelationships among historical data, the forecasted income statement, and the forecasted balance sheet
are all used to estimate each line item in the financial statements.

18.5 Forecasting Cash Flow and Assessing the Value of Growth

Once the income statement and balance sheet forecasts are complete, data from those statements,
information on company policies, and account relationships are used to generate a cash forecast. The cash
forecast is important for identifying any gaps in cash flow so that financial managers can plan for cash needs.
It's also important to review not only the cash forecast but all forecasted financial statements to assess the
overall impact and value of proposed firm growth.

18.6 Using Excel to Create the Long-Term Forecast

Excel can be a powerful tool for creating financial forecasts. Formulas that complete mathematical functions
and tie accounts and financial statements together are used to create the statements, ensure that they
balance, and facilitate scenario and sensitivity analyses.

     Key Terms

balance sheet a financial statement that reflects a firm's asset, liability, and equity account balances at a
    given point in time

cash deficit an excess of cash outflows over cash inflows for a given period
cash forecast a financial statement that estimates a firm's future cash inflows and outflows
cash surplus an excess of cash inflows over cash outflows for a given period
common-size describes a financial statement in which each element is expressed as a percentage of a base

    amount
financing activities cash business transactions reported on the statement of cash flows that reflect the use

    of financed funds
forecast an estimate of future performance based on historical performance and other contextual

    information
income statement a financial statement that measures a firm's financial performance over a given period of

    time
investing activities cash business transactions reported on the statement of cash flows that reflect the

    acquisition or disposal of long-term assets
560 18 · Multiple Choice

operating activities cash business transactions reported on the statement of cash flows that relate to
    ongoing day-to-day operations

pro forma in the context of financial statements, forward-looking
scenario analysis analysis of how various situations and circumstances would impact the financial forecast
sensitivity analysis analysis of the sensitivity of an output variable to a change in an input variable
statement of cash flows a financial statement that lists a firm's cash inflows and outflows over a given

    period of time
statement of stockholders' equity a financial statement that reports the difference between the beginning

    and ending balances of each of the stockholders' equity accounts during a given period

     Multiple Choice

 1. Which type of financial statement analysis is most commonly used to create a baseline estimate for a
     financial forecast?
      a. Trend analysis
      b. Common-size analysis
       c. Ratio analysis
      d. Liquidity analysis

 2. What key element of the income statement is used to estimate several other key income statement lines?
      a. Cost of goods sold
      b. Gross margin
       c. Sales
      d. Fixed costs

 3. Jamal wants to forecast sales for the first quarter of next year. His first assumption is that sales will likely
     grow by 3% in the coming year. If Jamal's monthly sales were $10,000, $9,000, and $11,000 in the first
     quarter of this year, what should his sales forecast be for the first quarter of next year?
      a. $30,000
      b. $30,900
       c. $33,000
      d. $33,500

 4. In the context of a firm's financial statements, what does pro forma mean?
      a. Forward looking
      b. Historical
       c. Board approved
      d. Audited

 5. What is the most common length of a forecast if the goal is to forecast cash and assess possible short-
     term growth?
      a. 3 months
      b. 12 months
       c. 3 years
      d. 5 years

 6. When completing a first pass at a forecasted income statement, which type of costs are assumed to be
     tied directly to sales?
      a. Fixed costs
      b. Period costs

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                 18 · Review Questions 561

     c. Variable costs
     d. Sunk costs

7. In the cash forecast, if cash inflows exceed cash outflows, what does this create?
     a. A cash surplus
     b. A cash deficit
     c. A long-term liability
     d. An undeclared dividend

8. Amelia wants to use a formula in Excel to estimate her utilities expense for each month. She normally pays
    her utilities within 30 days. What formula or link might she use in Excel to estimate her cash outflow for
    utilities?
     a. Sum the past three months' cost of goods sold from the forecasted income statement
     b. Link to the prior month's accounts payable from the forecasted balance sheet
     c. Link to the prior month's utilities expense from the forecasted balance sheet
     d. Link to the prior month's ending cash balance from the cash flow forecast

9. Amelia wants to use a formula in Excel to estimate her sales for each month. She believes her sales for the
    next year will be about 7% higher than this year's. She also has a big new ad campaign running late this
    year that she thinks will add another $5,000 to January sales. Which of the following is an appropriate Excel
    formula for Amelia's January sales?
     a. =(lastyearsalesA2*1.07)+5000
     b. =(lastyearsales+5000*1.07)
     c. =lastyearsalesA2+5000*.07
     d. =lastyearsalesA2*5000*1.07

    Review Questions

1. Javier's firm has created a forecasted income statement that shows the firm with a net profit of $25,000 for
    the coming year. What can we assume about Javier's cash flows?

2. Lulu's firm's sales grew by 9%, 11%, and 10% over the past three years, respectively. Lulu wants to take her
    first pass at forecasting sales for next year. What percent sales growth would you recommend she use,
    and why?

3. Aria wants to create a set of pro forma financial statements. Her goal is to plan for future cash flows and
    operations as well as help envision her long-term strategy. What time frames should Aria consider for her
    operations and cash flows versus her long-term strategy?

4. What information might you use to calculate the ending balance for retained earnings on a forecasted
    balance sheet?

5. Damon estimates his beginning cash balance for June to be $10,000, with cash inflows of $4,000 and cash
    outflows of $6,000 for the month. What is Damon's forecasted ending balance for June?

6. Tanneh wants to use an Excel formula to help her estimate sales for January in her forecasted income
    statement. She already has her sales estimate for the full year. Assuming she wants to use the past year's
    income statement percentages to forecast next year's sales, how would she calculate estimated sales for
    January?
562 18 · Problems

     Problems

 1. ABC Company has the following data for its monthly sales. Complete the % of Annual Sales row.

 2. Using the same data as in Problem 1, assume that ABC Company expects a 10% increase in sales in the
     coming year (10% more than the $575,000 it had in the past year). Prepare its sales forecast, assuming the
     company breaks its sales down by month using the same percentages as the actual sales from the past
     year, which you calculated in the first problem.

 3. ABC Company anticipates its sales being a bit lower than normal in January and February of the coming
     year due to major road construction on the street where it is located, which will draw away foot traffic
     from the store. The company anticipates that this will reduce its sales in these two months by 5%. Use the
     information from Problems 1-2 to update the sales forecast.

 4. ABC Company's cost of goods sold last year was 60%. It anticipates that this will be the same in the
     coming year. Its sales returns and allowances are small, normally 1% of sales. Use the information from
     Problems 1-3 to estimate the company's sales returns and allowances, net sales, and cost of goods sold
     and calculate its gross margin.

 5. Use the partial income statement generated in Problem 4 along with the following additional information
     to complete ABC Company's forecasted income statement in Excel.
      a. Rent expense is $1,000 per month. However, the landlord has indicated that rent will go up to $1,250
           in the fourth quarter.
      b. Depreciation expense is $2,250 per month and does not change throughout the year.
       c. Salaries expense is $1,500 per month and is expected to go up by 10% in the second half of the year,
           when a new compensation plan will be implemented.
      d. Utilities expense is $5,000 for the entire year and should be allocated to each month based on that
           month's percentage of annual sales.
      e. Interest expense is $500 per month.
       f. Income tax is 25% of operating income less interest expense.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         18 · Video Activity 563

     Video Activity

What Is a Pro Forma?
Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/what-is-a-pro-forma)
 1. What is a pro forma financial statement? What are some scenarios in which you might find a pro forma

     financial statement helpful?
 2. Why might someone compile a pro forma financial statement that is intentionally inaccurate? What factors

     contribute to the accuracy of a pro forma?
Cash Flow Forecasting Explained: How to Complete a Cash Flow Forecast Example
Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/Cash_Flow_Forecasting)
 3. Assume you are the financial manager for a large electronics retailer. What benefits could you gain from

     preparing a cash forecast?
 4. Assume you are the financial manager for a large electronics retailer. You are going to prepare a cash

     forecast. What key cash inflows and outflows do you anticipate will be in your forecast?
564 18 · Video Activity
Access for free at openstax.org
19 · Why It Matters                                                                                                             565

19
              The Importance of Trade Credit and Working Capital in Planning

Figure 19.1 Working capital describes the resources that are needed to meet the daily, weekly, and monthly operating cash flow
needs. (credit: modification of "Sealey Power Products Warehouse" by Mark Hunter/flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline

  19.1 What Is Working Capital?
  19.2 What Is Trade Credit?
  19.3 Cash Management
  19.4 Receivables Management
  19.5 Inventory Management
  19.6 Using Excel to Create the Short-Term Plan

      Why It Matters

During the COVID-19 pandemic, many families and small businesses realized the importance of financial
resiliency. In personal finance, financial resiliency is the ability to overcome financial difficulties such as sudden
job loss or significant unexpected expenses--to spring back quickly.

To help promote resiliency, personal financial planners advise clients to maintain liquid assets equal to three
to six months of living expenses, keep debt levels low, manage the household budget, keep insurance in force
(health, property, and life), establish a solid credit history, and make wise use of credit cards and home equity
lines of credit.

In business finance, financial resiliency is not important only during pandemics but is important through the
ups and downs of seasonal cycles and economic downturns. Managing cash, accounts receivable, and
inventory while making optimal use of trade credit (accounts payable) makes for a business that meets its
operating needs and pays its debts when due.

Working capital management is also critical during good times. Even though profits might be rising, a business
with growing demand for its products and services still needs to have working capital management tools to
pay its bills. Growth in sales and profits do not immediately mean sufficient cash flow, so planning ahead with
tools such as a cash budget is key.
566 19 · The Importance of Trade Credit and Working Capital in Planning

      19.1 What Is Working Capital?

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Define working capital.
         · Calculate a firm's operating cycle and cash cycle.
         · Compute inventory days, accounts receivable days, and accounts payable days.

       The concept of business capital is often associated with the cash and assets (such as land and equipment) that
       the owners contributed to the business. Early political economists like Adam Smith and Karl Marx identified
       this concept of capital, along with labor and entrepreneurship, to be the factors of production.

       That general idea of capital is important and critical to a company's productive capacity. This chapter is about
       a specific type of capital-- working capital--that is just as important as long-term capital. Working capital
       describes the resources that are needed to meet the daily, weekly, and monthly operating cash flow needs.
       Employees are paid out of working capital as well as cash from operations, the fulfillment of merchandise
       orders is possible because of working capital, and the liquidity of a company hinges upon how well
       management plans and controls working capital.

       Understanding working capital begins with the concept of current assets--those resources of a business that
       are cash, near cash, or expected to be turned into cash within a year through the normal operations of the
       business. Current assets are necessary for the everyday operation of the firm, and they are synonymous with
       term gross working capital.

       Cash is needed to pay the bills and meet the payroll. Excess cash is invested in cash alternatives such as
       marketable securities, creating liquidity that can be tapped when operating cash flow needs exceed the
       amount of cash on hand (checking account balances). Investment in inventory is necessary to meet the
       demand for products (sales), and if the firm extends credit to its customers so that a sale can be made, the
       balance sheet will also show accounts receivable--a very common current asset that derives its value from the
       probability that customers will pay their bills.

       Working capital is often spoken about in two versions: gross working capital and net working capital. As was
       previously stated, gross working capital is equivalent to current assets, particularly those that are cash, cash-
       like, or will be converted to cash within a short period of time (i.e., in less than one year).

       Net working capital (NWC) is a more refined concept of working capital. It is best understood by examining its
       formula:

      Goal of Working Capital Management

       The goal of working capital management is to maintain adequate working capital to

         · meet the operational needs of the company;
         · satisfy obligations (current liabilities) as they come due; and
         · maintain an optimal level of current assets such as cash (provides no return), accounts receivable, and

             inventory.

       Working capital management encompasses all decisions involving a company's current assets and current
       liabilities. One very important aspect of working capital management is to provide enough cash to satisfy both
       maturing short-term obligations and operational expenditures--keeping the company sufficiently liquid.

       In summary, working capital management helps a company run smoothly and mitigates the risk of illiquidity.
       Well-run companies make effective use of current liabilities to finance an optimal level of current assets and
       maintain sufficient cash balances to meet short-term operating goals and to satisfy short-term obligations.
       Working capital management is accomplished through

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                              19.1 · What Is Working Capital? 567

  · cash management;
  · credit and receivables management;
  · inventory management; and
  · accounts payable management.

Components of Working Capital Management

In contrast to net working capital, gross working capital is synonymous with current assets, particularly those
current assets that are either cash or cash equivalents or that will be converted to cash within a short period of
time (i.e., in less than one year).
Below is a list of the components of gross working capital.

  · Cash and cash equivalents
  · Marketable securities
  · Accounts receivable
  · Inventory
Here is an example. On December 31, a company has the following balances and gross working capital:

Think of the $1,105,000 of gross working capital as a source of funds for the most pressing obligations (i.e.,
current liabilities) of the company. Gross working capital is available to pay the bills. However, some of the
current assets would need to be converted to cash first. Accounts receivable need to be collected, and
inventory would need to be sold before it too can become cash. What if the company had $600,000 of current
liabilities? That amount of current obligations could not be paid out of cash until the marketable securities
were sold and a significant portion of accounts receivable were collected.
The second, more refined and useful concept of working capital is net working capital:

For example, if a company has $1,000,000 of current assets and $750,000 of current liabilities, its net working
capital would be $250,000 ($1,000,000 less $750,000).
NWC provides a better picture because it takes into account the liability "coverage" provided by the current
assets. As the above example shows, the current assets would "cover" the current liabilities with an excess of
$250,000. Think of it this way: if the current assets could be converted to cash, they could be used to meet the
current obligations with another $250,000 of cash leftover.
Current liabilities include

  · accounts payable;
  · dividends payable;
  · notes payable (due within a year);
  · current portion of deferred revenue;
  · current maturities of long-term debt;
  · interest payable;
  · income taxes payable; and
  · accrued expenses such as compensation owed to employees.
Net working capital possibilities can be thought of as a spectrum from negative working capital to positive, as
568 19 · The Importance of Trade Credit and Working Capital in Planning

explained in Table 19.1.

  Negative Net Working Capital              Zero Net Working Capital         Positive Net Working Capital
Current liabilities are greater than
current assets.                         Current assets equal current         Current assets are greater than
                                        liabilities.                         current liabilities.
Could indicate a liquidity problem.
There is difficulty satisfying current  Indicates that current assets could  Indicates that the company can
obligations.                            cover current obligations. However,  meet its current obligations.
                                        there is no positive margin (safety  However, excessively high net
                                        cushion) or "liquid reserve" to      working capital could mean too
                                        satisfy unexpected cash needs.       little cash and therefore an
                                                                             opportunity cost (forgoing rates of
                                                                             return on alternative investment).

Table 19.1 Spectrum of Net Working Capital

Measures of Financial Health provides information on a variety of financial ratios to help users of financial
statements understand the strengths and weakness of companies' financial statements. Three of the financial
ratios covered in that chapter are brought back into this chapter's discussion to demonstrate how financial
managers examine working capital and liquidity. Liquidity is the ease with which an asset can be converted
into cash. Those ratios are the current ratio, the quick ratio, and the cash ratio. A higher ratio indicates a
greater level of liquidity.

The formulas for the three liquidity ratios are:

Notice how the current ratio includes the two elements of net working capital--current assets and current
liabilities. It makes for a quick comparison of relative size or proportion.

THINK IT THROUGH

Current Ratio

A company has $2,000,000 of current assets, while its current liabilities are $1,000,000. What is the current
ratio, and what does it mean?

Solution:

The current ratio would be                                  which is a 2:1 proportion of current asset value to

the amount of the current liabilities. This means that if all the current assets could be converted to cash,

then the current liabilities could be satisfied two times.

There are two drawbacks to the current ratio: (1) it is a working capital analytic as of a point in time but is not
indicative of future liquidity or future cash flows and (2) as an indicator of liquidity, it can be deceptive if a
significant proportion of the current assets are inventory, supplies, or prepaid expenses. Inventory is not very
liquid as it can take an extended time period to convert to cash, and assets such as supplies and prepaid
expenses never become cash and therefore are not a source of funds to pay bills.

The quick ratio is considered a more conservative indication of liquidity since it does not include a firm's

Access for free at openstax.org
                               19.1 · What Is Working Capital? 569

inventory:                  .

THINK IT THROUGH

Quick Ratio

A company's current assets total $2,000,000, but $500,000 of that is inventory and the current liabilities total
$1,000,000. What is the quick ratio, and what does it mean?

Solution:

The quick ratio would be    and would indicate a smaller cushion of net
working capital.

THINK IT THROUGH

Cash Ratio

The cash ratio is even more conservative in that it presents a picture of liquidity by excluding all current
assets except cash and marketable securities.

A company's total current assets are $2,000,000, but only $1,100,000 of the current assets consist of cash
and marketable securities. Assuming $1,000,000 of current liabilities, what would be the cash ratio and what
does it mean?

Solution:

The cash ratio would be     and the amount of cash is enough to pay the
current bills by $100,000.

Working capital ratios, like any financial ratio, are most valuable when examined in light of trends and in
comparison to industry/peer averages. For example, a deteriorating current ratio over several quarters (a
decline in the company's current ratio) could indicate a reduced ability to pay bills.

Working capital ratios are also compared to industry averages, which are available in databases produced by
such financial publishers as Dun & Bradstreet, Dow Jones Company, and the Risk Management Association
(RMA). These information services are available via subscriptions and through many libraries. For example, if a
company's current ratio is 0.9 while the industry average is 2.0, then the company is less liquid than the
average company in its industry and strategies, and techniques need to be considered to change things and to
better compete with peer groups. Industry averages can be aspirational, motivating management to set
liquidity goals and best practices for working capital management.

It is common to think about working capital with a simple assumption: current assets are being "financed" by
current liabilities. However, such an assumption may be an oversimplification. Some level of current assets is
often necessary to meet longer-term obligations, and in that way, you could think of some amount of current
assets as a permanent based of working capital that may need to be financed with longer-term sources of
capital.

Think of a company with seasonal business. During busy times, more working capital will be needed than
during certain other portions of the year, such as less busy times. But there will always be some level--a
permanent base--of working capital needed. Think of it this way: the total working capital of many companies
will ebb and flow depending on many variables such as the operating cycle, production needs, and the growth
of revenue. Therefore, working capital can be thought of as having a permanent base that is always needed
570 19 · The Importance of Trade Credit and Working Capital in Planning

       and a total working capital amount that increases when activity levels (i.e., production and sales volume) are
       higher (see Figure 19.2).
       The Cash Cycle
       The cash cycle, also called the cash conversion cycle, is the time period between when a business begins
       production and acquires resources from its suppliers (for example, acquisition of materials and other forms of
       inventory) and when it receives cash from its customers. This is offset by the time it takes to pay suppliers
       (called the payables deferral period).

                                    Figure 19.2 Working Capital Needs Can Vary: Temporary and Permanent Working Capital

       The cash cycle is measured in days, and it is best understood by examining its formula:

       The inventory conversion period is also called the days of inventory. It is the time (days) it takes to convert
       inventory to sales and is calculated by following these steps:
        1. First, calculate the Inventory Turnover Ratio using this formula:

             The Average Inventory is arrived at as follows:

        2. Then, use the Inventory Turnover Ratio to calculate the Inventory Conversion Period:

       The receivables collection period, also called the days sales outstanding (DSO) or the average collection
       period, is the number of days it typically takes to collect cash from a credit sale. It is calculated by following
       these steps:
        1. First, calculate the Accounts Receivable Turnover using this formula:

             The Average Accounts Receivable is arrived at as follows:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                              19.1 · What Is Working Capital? 571

2. Then, use the Accounts Receivable Turnover to calculate the Receivables Collection Period:

The payables deferral period, also known as days in payables, is the average number of days its takes for a
company to pay its suppliers. It is calculated by following these steps:
1. First, calculate the Accounts Payable Turnover using this formula:

      The Average Accounts Payable is arrived at as follows:

2. Then, use the Accounts Payable Turnover to calculate the Payables Deferral Period:

 THINK IT THROUGH
 Periods of the Cash Cycle

  Scenario 1: King Sized Products (KSP) Inc. has annual credit sales of $40,000,000. The average inventory is
  $3,000,000, and the company has average accounts receivable of $6,000,000 and average accounts payable
  of $2,800,000. The cost of goods sold for KSP Inc. is $30,000,000. The cash cycle for the company is 57.2
  days. Calculate the inventory conversion, receivables collection, and payable deferral periods.
  Solution:
  Inventory conversion period:

    ·
    ·
  Receivables collection period:
    ·
    ·
  Payables deferral period:
    ·
    ·

  The solution (the entire cash conversion cycle) is also illustrated in a chart, Figure 19.3.
572 19 · The Importance of Trade Credit and Working Capital in Planning

                                                                             Figure 19.3 Cash Conversion Cycle

       Shortening the inventory conversion period and the receivables collection period or lengthening the payables
       deferral period shortens the cash conversion cycle. Financial managers monitor and analyze each component
       of the cash conversion cycle. Ideally, a company's management should minimize the number of days it takes
       to convert inventory to cash while maximizing the amount of time it takes to pay suppliers.
       Quickly converting inventory to sales speeds up cash inflows and shortens the cash cycle, but it also could help
       reduce inventory losses as a result of obsolescence. Inventory becomes obsolete because of a variety of
       factors including time--inventory that has not been sold for a long period of time and is not expected to be
       sold in the future has to be written down or written off according to accounting rules. Write-offs of inventory
       can result in significant losses for a company. In the food business, inventory conversion periods take on great
       importance because of spoilage of perishable goods; in retailing, seasonal items lose value the longer they
       stay on the shelves.
       Various inventory management techniques are used to shorten production time in manufacturing, and in
       retailing, strategies are used to reduce the amount of time a product sits on the shelf or is stored in the
       warehouse. Production techniques such as just-in-time inventory systems and marketing and pricing
       strategies can have an impact on the number of days in the inventory conversion cycle.
       For the receivables collection period, a relatively long receivables collection period means that the company is
       having trouble collecting cash from its customers and so whatever can be done to speed up collections while
       still offering competitive credit terms should be pursued by financial managers. For example, companies that
       converted paper invoicing to e-invoicing most likely reduce the average collection period by some number of
       days, as it makes sense that if a bill is transmitted electronically, lag time is cut (no delays because of "snail
       mail") and collections (payments back to the company from customers) may happen sooner. Other credit
       management techniques, some of which are explained in subsequent sections, can help minimize and control
       the receivables collection period.
       The payables deferral period is the one element that probably cannot be optimized without violating credit
       terms. Certainly, cash balances can be conserved by delaying payments to vendors for as long as possible;
       however, payments on trade credit need to be made on time or the company's relationship with the supplier
       can suffer. In a worst-case scenario, the company's credit rating could also deteriorate.
       A credit rating, also called a credit score, is a measure produced by an independent agency indicating the

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                              19.1 · What Is Working Capital? 573

likelihood that a company will meet its financial obligations as they come due; it is an indication of the
company's ability to pay its creditors. Three business credit rating services are Equifax Small Business,
Experian Business, and Dun & Bradstreet.

 THINK IT THROUGH

 The Cash Conversion Cycle

  Considering the previous Think It Through (Scenario 1), what if you could reduce inventory levels, hold
  lower accounts receivable balances, and rely more heavily on accounts payable while maintaining the same
  sales level?
  Here's Scenario 2. Because of better inventory management, credit and collections management, and
  negotiation of longer payment periods with vendors, King Sized Products (KSP) Inc. needs less investment
  in inventory and accounts receivable and is able to utilize a greater amount of trade credit financing.
  Annual credit sales are $40,000,000, average inventory is $2,800,000, average accounts receivable are
  $5,500,000, average accounts payable are $3,300,000, and cost of goods sold is $30,000,000. What is the
  cash conversion cycle?
  Solution:
  Inventory conversion period:

    ·
    ·
    ·

  Receivables collection period:

    ·
    ·

  Payables deferral period:

    ·
    ·

Notice that the investment in inventory and accounts receivable is less and the average accounts payable is
more with no change in credit sales and cost of goods sold--you would certainly anticipate a reduction in
the cash conversion cycle. The improvement would be about 13 days (from 57.2 in Scenario 1 to 44.1 days in
Scenario 2). Figure 19.4 shows a bar chart comparison of the two scenarios.

                               Scenario 1 Scenario 2

Inventory Conversion Period    36.50  34.07

Receivables Collection Period  54.75  50.21

Payables Deferral Period       34.07  40.15

Cash Conversion Cycle          57.18  44.10

Table 19.2
574 19 · The Importance of Trade Credit and Working Capital in Planning

                                           Figure 19.4 Scenario 1 and 2 Comparison: Shortening the Cash Conversion Cycle

       LINK TO LEARNING

         A Harvard Business School blog post, How Amazon Survived the Dot-Com Bubble (https://openstax.org/r/
         how-amazon-survived), discusses how Amazon managed its cash conversion cycle to the point where it was
         receiving payment for the things it sold before Amazon had to pay for them. In that way, Amazon had a
         negative cash conversion cycle (which is really a huge positive for a company trying to manage positive
         cash flow!).

       Working Capital Needs by Industry
       When comparing working capital needs by industry, you can see some variation. For example, some
       companies in the grocery business can have very low cash conversion cycles, while construction companies
       can have very high cash conversion cycles. And some companies, like those in the restaurant business, can
       have very low numbers and even have negative cash conversion cycles.
       Working capital can also differ from one industry to another. An often cited general rule is that a current ratio
       of 2 is considered optimal. However, general rules of thumb must be treated with caution. A better
       benchmarking approach is to compare a firm's ratios--current ratio and quick ratios--to the average of the
       industry in which the subject company operates.
       Take, for example, a home construction company. Such as firm has a long operating cycle because of the
       production process (building homes), and the "storage of finished goods" can result in very high current
       ratios--such as 11 or 12 times current liabilities--whereas a retailer like Walmart or Target would have much
       lower current ratios.
       In recent years, Walmart Stores Inc. (NYSE: WMT) has had a current ratio of around 0.9 and has been able to
       manage its working capital needs by efficient management of its supply chain, quick turnover of inventory,
       and a very small investment in accounts receivables.1 Big retailers like Walmart are effective at negotiating
       favorable payment terms with their vendors. The ability to generate consistent positive cash flow from
       operations allows a retailer like Walmart to operate with relatively low amounts of working capital.
       The credit policies of a company also affect working capital. A company with a liberal credit policy will require a
       greater amount of working capital, as collection periods of accounts receivable are longer and therefore tie up

        1 Walmart Inc. "2020 Annual Report." 2020. https://corporate.walmart.com/media-library/document/2020-walmart-annual-
        report/_proxyDocument?id=00000171-a3ea-dfc0-af71-b3fea8490000

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                   19.2 · What Is Trade Credit? 575

more dollars in receivables.

Almost all businesses will have times when additional working capital is needed to pay bills, meet the payroll
(salaries and wages), and plan for accrued expenses. The wait for the cash to flow into the company's treasury
from the collection of receivables and cash sales can be longer during tough times.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, the US government made paycheck protection program (PPP) loans available
to help alleviate working capital problems for small and large business when the economy slowed because of
shutdowns and social distancing. And although 60 percent of the PPP loan proceeds were to go to cover
payroll-related costs, 40 percent could be used to bolster working capital to meet rent, utilities costs, and some
interest expense while companies were "treading water"--waiting for positive cash flow to pick up under a
recovery.2

It isn't just during downturns that working capital is strained. Growing companies, even if they are extremely
profitable, need additional working capital as they ramp up operations by acquiring raw materials, component
parts, supplies, or other forms of inventory; hiring temporary or additional employees; and taking on new
projects. Whenever additional resources are needed, working capital is also needed.

Some of the current assets and expenditures needed in a growing company may need to be financed from
sources that are not spontaneous financing--trade credit (accounts payable). Such forms of external
financing such as lines of credit, short-term bank loans, inventory-based loans (also called floor planning),
and the factoring of accounts receivables might have to be relied upon.

 19.2 What Is Trade Credit?

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Compute the cost of trade credit.
  · Define cash discount.
  · Define discount period.
  · Define credit period.

Trade credit, also known as accounts payable, is a critical part of a business's working capital management
strategy. Trade credit is granted by vendors to creditworthy companies when those companies purchase
materials, inventory, and services.

A company's purchasing system is usually integrated with other functions such production planning and sales
forecasting. Purchasing managers search for and evaluate vendors, negotiate order quantities, and prepare
purchase orders. In carrying out the purchasing process, credit terms are granted by the company's vendors
and purchases of inventory and services can be made on trade credit accounts--allowing the purchaser time
to pay. The purchaser carries an accounts payable balance until the account is paid.

Trade credit is referred to as spontaneous financing, as it occurs spontaneously with the gearing up of
operations and the additional investment in current assets. Think of it this way: If sales are increasing, so too is
production. Increased sales mean more current assets (accounts receivable and inventory), and increased
sales mean increases in accounts payable (financing happening spontaneously with increased sales and
inventory purchases). Compared to other financing arrangements, such as lines of credit and bank loans,
trade credit is convenient, simple, and easy to use.

Once a company is approved for trade credit, there is no paperwork or contracts to sign, as is the case with
various forms of bank financing. Invoices specify the credit terms, and there is usually no interest expense
associated with trade credit. Accounts payable is a type of obligation that is interest-free and is distinguished
from debt obligations, such as notes payable, that require the creditor to pay back principal and interest.

2 US Small Business Administration. "PPP Loan Forgiveness." n.d. https://www.sba.gov/funding-programs/loans/covid-19-relief-
options/paycheck-protection-program/ppp-loan-forgiveness
576 19 · The Importance of Trade Credit and Working Capital in Planning

How Trade Credit Works

Trade credit is common in B2B (business to business) transactions and is analogous to consumer spending
using a credit card. With a credit card, a consumer opens an account with a credit limit. Most trade credit is
offered to a company with an open account that has a credit limit up to which the company can purchase
goods or services without having to pay the cash up front. As long as the payments are made in accordance
with the terms of the agreement (also called credit terms), no interest or additional fees are charged on the
credit balance except possibly for a fee for late payment.

Initially, the vendor's credit department approves both a trade credit limit and credit payment terms (i.e.,
number of days after the invoice date that payment is due). Timely payments on accounts payable (trade
credit) helps create a credit history for the purchasing firm.

Trade Credit Terms

Trade credit arrangements often carry credit terms that offer an incentive, called a discount, for a company
(the buyer) to pay its bill within a relatively short period of time. Net terms, also referred to as the full credit
period, are the number of days that a business (purchaser) has before they must pay their invoice. A common
net term is Net 30, with payment due in full within 30 days of the invoice.

Many vendors also offer cash discounts to customers that pay their bill early. A company's invoice that
specifies payment terms of "2/10 n/30" (stated as: "two ten net 30") would allow a 2 percent discount if the
buyer's account balance is paid within 10 days of the invoice date; otherwise, the net amount owed would be
due in 30 days. The "10 days" in the example is the discount period--the number of days the buyer has to
take advantage of the cash discount for an early payment, also known as quick payment.

For example, Jackson's Premium Jams Inc. received a $10,500 invoice for the purchase of jelly jars. The invoice

has payment terms of 2/10 n/30. Jackson's pays the bill within 10 days of the invoice date. Jackson's payment

would be                         . The effect of taking a discount because of a quick payment

is a lowering of the cost of inventory in the case of purchases of materials (for a manufacturer), merchandise

(for a retailer or wholesaler), and operating expenses (for any company that "buys" services using trade

credit). In Cost of Trade Credit, there is an example that shows the high annualize opportunity cost (36.73

percent) of not taking advantage of cash discounts.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE

Trade Credit of International Trade

When international trade occurs, two important documents are commonly required: a letter of credit and
a bill of lading. A letter of credit is issued by a financial institution on behalf of the foreign buyer
(importer). The bill of lading is a legal document that gives proof of a contract between a transportation
company and the buyer and is one important piece of documentation that allows the buyer to draw on the
letter of credit. A bill of lading serves as a document of title and proof of receipt of goods by the shipper.

The letter of credit secures a promise of payment to the seller (exporter) provided that the terms of the sale
are met. For an international trade transaction, the letter of credit is the main mechanism that establishes a
liability for the buyer. Instead of a trade payable, the buyer uses a line of credit from a bank.

Cost of Trade Credit

Trade credit is often referred to as a no-cost type of financing. Unlike with other credit arrangements (e.g.,
bank loans, lines of credit, and commercial paper), there is usually no interest expense associated with trade
credit, and as long as your account does not become delinquent, there are no special fees. Some accounts
payable arrangements specify an interest penalty or a late fee when the account goes delinquent, but as long

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                        19.3 · Cash Management 577

as payments are made on time, trade credit is thought of as a low-cost source of working capital.
However, there is one possible cost associated with trade credit for companies that don't take advantage of
cash discounts when offered by sellers. Using accounts payable to purchase goods and services can involve an
opportunity cost--a cost of the forgone opportunity of making a quick payment and benefiting from a cash
discount. A business that does not take advantage of a cash discount for early payment of trade credit will pay
more for goods and services than a business that routinely takes advantage of discounts.
The annual percentage rate of forgoing quick payment discounts can be estimated with the following formula:

Example: Novelty Accessories Inc. (NAI) purchases products from a vendor that offers credit payment terms of
2/10, net 30. The annual cost to NAI of not taking advantage of the discount for quick payment is 36.73
percent.

 19.3 Cash Management

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Explain why firms hold cash.
  · List instruments available to a financial manager for investing cash balances.

Cash management means efficiently collecting cash from customers and managing cash outflows. To manage
cash, the cash budget--a forward-looking document--is an important planning tool. To understand cash
management, you must first understand what is meant by cash holdings and the motivations (reasons) for
holding cash. A cash budget example is covered in Using Excel to Create the Short-Term Plan.

Cash Holdings

The cash holdings of a company are more than the currency and coins in the cash registers or the treasury
vault. Cash includes currency and coins, but usually those amounts are insignificant compared to the cash
holdings of checks to be deposited in the company's bank account and the balances in the company's
checking accounts.
Motivations for Holding Cash
The initial answer to the question of why companies hold cash is pretty obvious: because cash is how we pay
the bills--it is the medium of exchange. The transactional motive of holding cash means that checks and
electronic funds transfers are necessary to meet the payroll (pay the employees), pay the vendors, satisfy
creditors (principal and interest payments on loans), and reward stockholders with dividend payments. Cash
for transaction is one reason to hold cash, but there is another reason--one that stems from uncertainty and
the precautions you might take to be ready for the unexpected.
Just as you keep cash balances in your checking and savings accounts and even a few dollars in your wallet or
purse for unexpected expenditures, cash balances are also necessary for a business to provide for unexpected
events. Emergencies might require a company to write a check for repairs, for an unexpected breakdown of
equipment, or for hiring temporary workers. This motive of holding cash is called the precautionary motive.
Some companies maintain a certain amount of cash instead of investing it in marketable securities or in
upgrades or expansion of operations. This is called the speculative motive. Companies that want to quickly
take advantage of unexpected opportunities want to be quick to purchase assets or to acquire a business, and
a certain amount of cash or quick access to cash is necessary to jump on an opportunity.
578 19 · The Importance of Trade Credit and Working Capital in Planning

Sometimes cash balances may be required by a bank with which a company conducts significant business.
These balances are called compensating balances and are typically a minimum amount to be maintained in
the company's checking account.

For example, Jack's Outback Restaurant Group borrowed $500,000 from First National Bank and Trust. As part
of the loan agreement, First National Bank required Jack's to keep at least $50,000 in its company checking
account as a way of compensating the bank for other corporate services it provides to Jack's Outback
Restaurant Group.

Cash Alternatives

Cash that a company has that is in excess of projected financial needs is often invested in short-term
investments, also known as cash equivalents (cash alternatives). The reason for this is that cash does not earn
a rate of return; therefore, too much idle cash can affect the profitability of a business.

Table 19.3 shows a list of typical investment vehicles used by corporations to earn interest on excess cash.
Financial managers search for opportunities that are safe and highly liquid and that will provide a positive rate
of return. Cash alternatives, because of their short-term maturities, have low interest rate risk (the risk that an
investment's value will decrease because of changes in market interest rates). In that way, prudent investment
of excess cash follows the risk/return trade-off; in order to achieve safe returns, the returns will be lower than
the possible returns achieved with risky investments. Cash alternative investments are not committed to the
stock market.

      Security                                                             Description
US Treasury bills  Obligations of the US government with maturities of 3 and 6 months
Federal agency     Obligations of federal government agencies such as the Federal Home Loan Bank and the
securities         Federal National Mortgage Association
Certificates of
deposit            Issued by banks, a type of savings deposit that pays interest
Commercial
paper              Short-term promissory notes issued by large corporations with maturities ranging from a
                   few days to a maximum of 270 days

Table 19.3 Typical Cash Equivalents

Figure 19.5 shows a note within the 2021 Annual Report (Form 10-K) of Target Corporation. The note discloses
the amount of Target's cash and cash equivalent balances of $8,511,000,000 for January 30, 2021, and
$2,577,000,000 for February 1, 2020.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                             19.4 · Receivables Management 579

         Figure 19.5 Note from Target Corporation 2021 10-K Filing (source: US Securities and Exchange Commission/EDGAR)

In that note, which is a supplement to the company's balance sheet, receivables from third-party financial
institutions is also considered a cash equivalent. That is because purchases by Target's customers who use
their credit cards (e.g., VISA or MasterCard) create very short-term receivables--amounts that Target is waiting
to collect but are very close to a cash sale. So instead of being reported as accounts receivable--a line item on
the Target balance sheet that is separate from cash and cash equivalents--these amounts receivable from
third-party financial institutions are considered part of the cash and cash equivalents and are a very liquid asst.
For example, the amount of $560,000,000 for January 30, 2021, is considered a cash equivalent since the
settlement of these accounts will happen in a day or two with cash deposited in Target's bank accounts. When
a retailer sells product and accepts a credit card such as VISA, MasterCard, or American Express, the cash
collection happens very soon after the credit card sale--typically within 24 to 72 hours.3
Companies also invest excess funds in marketable securities. These are debt and equity investments such as
corporate and government bonds, preferred stock, and common stock of other entities that can be readily sold
on a stock or bond exchange. Ford Motor Company has this definition of marketable securities in its 2019
Annual Report (Form 10-K):
"Investments in securities with a maturity date greater than three months at the date of purchase and other
securities for which there is more than an insignificant risk of change in value due to interest rate, quoted
price, or penalty on withdrawal are classified as Marketable securities."4

 19.4 Receivables Management

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Discuss how decisions on extending credit are made.
  · Explain how to monitor accounts receivables.

For any business that sells goods or services on credit, effective accounts receivable management is critical for
cash flow and profitability planning and for the long-term viability of the company. Receivables management
begins before the sale is made when a number of factors must be considered.

  · Can the customer be approved for a credit sale?

3 Creditcardprocessing.com. "How Long Does it Take for a Merchant to Receive Funds?" n.d.
https://www.creditcardprocessing.com/resource/article/long-take-merchant-receive-
funds/#:~:text=The%20time%20that%20it%20takes,days%20to%20process%20the%20payment
4 Ford Motor Company. "2019 Annual Report." n.d. https://s23.q4cdn.com/725981074/files/doc_downloads/Ford-2019-Printed-
Annual-Report.pdf
580 19 · The Importance of Trade Credit and Working Capital in Planning

         · If the credit is approved, what will be the credit terms (i.e., how long do we give customers to pay their
             bills)?

         · Will there be a cash discount for quick payment?
         · How much credit should be extended to each customer (credit limit)?

       Accounts receivable is not about accepting credit cards. Credit card sales are not technically accounts
       receivable. When a credit card is accepted, it means that the credit card company (e.g., VISA, MasterCard, or
       American Express) will guarantee the payment. The cash will be deposited in the merchant's bank account in a
       very short period of time.

       When a business makes a sale on account, management (e.g., a credit manager or analyst) does its best to
       distinguish between customers who have a high likelihood of paying and customers who have a low likelihood.
       Customers with low credit risk are approved; the decision is based on an effective analysis of creditworthiness.

       Creditworthiness is judged by looking at a number of factors including an evaluation of the customer's
       financial statements, financial ratios, and credit reports (credit scores) based on a customer's payment history
       on credits owed to other firms. If a company has a prior relationship with a customer seeking trade credit, the
       customer's payment history with the firm is also carefully evaluated before additional credit is granted.

       LINK TO LEARNING

       Corporate Finance Institute

         Credit managers use various tools and techniques to evaluate creditworthiness of customers. The
         Corporate Finance Institute's website states that "the `5 Cs of Credit' is a common phrase used to describe
         the five major factors [character, capacity, collateral, capital, and conditions] used to determine a potential
         borrower's creditworthiness." It goes on to say that "a credit report provides a comprehensive account of
         the borrower's total debt, current balances, credit limits, and history of defaults and bankruptcies, if any."5
         More on the 5 Cs of credit can be found on the Corporate Finance Institute's website (https://openstax.org/
         r/corporate-finance).

      Determining the Credit Policy

       A company's credit policy encompasses rules of credit granting and procedures for the collections of accounts.
       It's how a company will process credit applications, utilize credit scoring and credit bureaus, analyze financial
       statements, make credit limit decisions, and conduct collection efforts when accounts become delinquent (still
       outstanding after their due date).

      Establishing Credit Terms

       Trade credit terms were discussed earlier. Recall that part of the terms and conditions of a sale are the credit
       terms--elements of a sales agreement (contract) that indicate when payment is due, possible discounts (for
       quick payments), and any late fee charges.

       If open credit is for a sales transaction, an agreement is made as to the length of time for which credit is to be
       granted (payment period) and a discount for early payment. Although companies are free to establish credit
       terms as they see fit, most companies look to the practice of the particular industry in which they operate. The
       credit terms offered by the competition are a factor. Net terms usually range between 30 days and 90 days,
       depending on the industry. Discounts for early payments also differ and are typically from 1 to 3 percent.

       Establishing credit terms offered can be thought of as a decision process similar to setting a price for products
       and services. Just as a price is the result of a market forces, so too are credit terms. If credit terms are not

        5 Corporate Finance Institute. "What Are the 5 Cs of Credit?" n.d. https://corporatefinanceinstitute.com/resources/knowledge/
        credit/5-cs-of-credit/

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                             19.4 · Receivables Management 581

competitive within the industry, sales can suffer. Typically, companies follow standard industry credit terms. If
most companies in an industry offer a discount for early payments, then most companies will follow suit and
also offer an equal discount.

Once credit terms are established, they can be changed based on both marketing strategies and financial
management goals. For example, discounts for early payments can be more generous, or the full credit
period can be extended to stimulate additional sales. Both discount periods and full credit periods can be
tightened to try to speed up collections. The establishment of and changes to credit terms are usually made in
consultation with the sales and financial management departments.

Monitoring Accounts Receivables

Financial managers monitor accounts receivables using some basic tools. One of those tools is the accounts
receivable aging schedule (report). To prepare the aging schedule, a classifying of customer account
balances is performed with age as the sorting attribute.

An account receivable begins its life as a credit sale. The age of a receivable is the number of days that have
transpired since the credit sale was made (the date of the invoice). For example, if a credit sale was made on
June 1 and is still unpaid on July 15, that receivable is 45 days old. Aging of accounts is thought to be a useful
tool because of the idea that the longer the time owed, the greater the possibility that individual accounts
receivable will prove to be uncollectible.

An aging schedule is a report that organizes the outstanding (unpaid) receivable balances into age categories.
The receivables are grouped by the length of time they have been outstanding, and an uncollectible
percentage is assigned to each category. The length of uncollectible time increases the percentage assigned.
For example, a category might consist of accounts receivable that are 0-30 days past due and is assigned an
uncollectible percentage of 6 percent. Another category might be 31-60 days past due and is assigned an
uncollectible percentage of 15 percent. All categories of estimated uncollectible amounts are summed to get a
total estimated uncollectible balance.

The aging of accounts is useful to the credit and collection managers, both from a global view--estimating
how much of the accounts receivable asset might be bad debts--and on a micro basis--being able to drill
down to see which specific customers are slow paying or delinquent so as to implement collection tactics.

Accountants and auditors also find the aging of accounts to determine a reasonable amount to be reported as
bad debt expense and to establish a sufficient balance in the allowance for doubtful accounts. Bad debt
expense is the cost of doing business because some customers will not pay the amounts they owe (accounts
receivable), while the allowance for doubtful accounts is a contra-asset (it will be deducted from accounts
receivable on the balance sheet) that contains management's best guess (management's estimate) as to how
much of its accounts receivable will never be collected.

In Figure 19.6, Foodinia Inc.'s accounts receivable aging report shows that the total receivables balance is
$189,000. The company splits its accounts into four age categories: not due, 30 to 60 days past due, 61 to 90
days past due, and more than 90 days past due. Of the $189,000 owed to Foodinia by its customers, $75,500
($189,000 less $113,500) of invoices have been outstanding (not paid yet) beyond their due dates.
582 19 · The Importance of Trade Credit and Working Capital in Planning

                                                      Figure 19.6 Foodinia Inc. Aging of Accounts Receivable Schedule

       In addition to preparing aging schedules, financial managers also use financial ratios to monitor receivables.
       The accounts receivable turnover ratio determines how many times (i.e., how often) accounts receivable are
       collected during an operating period and converted to cash. A higher number of times indicates that
       receivables are collected quickly. In contrast, a lower accounts receivable turnover indicates that receivables
       are collected at a slower rate, taking more days to collect from a customer.
       Another receivables ratio is the number of days' sales in receivables ratio, also called the receivables collection
       period--the expected days it will take to convert accounts receivable into cash. A comparison of a company's
       receivables collection period to the credit terms granted to customers can alert management to collection
       problems. Both the accounts receivable turnover ratio and receivables collection period are covered, including
       the formulas for calculating the ratios, in the previous section of this chapter.

      Accounts Receivables and Notes Receivable

       An accounts receivable is an informal arrangement between a seller (a company) and customer. Accounts
       receivable are usually paid within a month or two. Accounts receivable don't require any complex paperwork,
       are evidenced by an invoice, and do not involve interest payments. In contrast, a note receivable is a more
       formal arrangement that is evidence by a legal contract called a promissory note specifying the payment
       amount and date and interest.
       The length of a note receivable can be for any time period including a term longer than the typical account
       receivable. Some notes receivable have a term greater than a year. The assets of a bank include many notes
       receivable (a loan made by a bank is an asset for the bank).
       A note receivable can be used in exchange for products and services or in exchange for cash (usually in the
       case of a financial lender). Sometimes a company might request that a slow-paying customer sign a note
       promissory note to further secure the receivable, charge interest, or add some type of collateral to the
       arrangement, in which case the receivable would be called a secured promissory note. Several characteristics
       of notes receivable further define the contract elements and scope of use (see Table 19.4).

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               19.5 · Inventory Management 583

                    Accounts Receivable                                 Notes Receivable

· An informal agreement between customer and    · A legal contract with established payment terms
   company                                      · Receivable beyond one year and outside of a

· Receivable in less than one year or within a     company's operating cycle
   company's operating cycle                    · Includes interest
                                                · Could stipulate collateral
· Does not include interest

Table 19.4 Key Feature Comparison of Accounts Receivable and Notes Receivable

 19.5 Inventory Management

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Outline the costs of holding inventory.
  · Outline the benefits of holding inventory.

Financial managers must consider the impact of inventory management on working capital. Earlier in the
chapter, the concept of the inventory conversion cycle was covered. The number of days that goods are held
by a business is one of the focal points of inventory management.

Managers look to minimize inventory balances and raise inventory turnover ratios while trying to balance the
needs of operations and sales. Purchasing personnel need to order enough inventory to "feed" production or
to stock the shelves. The sales force wants to meet or surpass their sales budgets, and the operations people
need inventory for the factories, warehouses, and e-commerce sites.

The days in inventory ratio measures the average number of days between acquiring inventory (i.e.,
purchasing merchandise) and its sale. This ratio is a metric to be watched and monitored by inventory
managers and, if possible, minimized. A high days in inventory ratio could mean "aging" inventory. Old
inventory could mean obsolesce or, in the case of perishable goods, spoilage. In either case, old inventory
means losses.

Imagine a company selling high-tech products such as consumer electronics. A high days in inventory ratio
could mean that technologically obsolete products will be sold at a discount. There are similar issues with
older inventory in the fashion industry. Last year's styles are not as appealing to the fashion-conscious
consumer and are usually sold at significant discounts. In the accounting world, lower of cost or market value
is a test of inventory value to determine if inventory needs to be "written down," meaning that the company
takes an expense for inventory that has lost significant value. Lower of cost or market is required by Generally
Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) to state inventory valuations at realistic and conservative values.

Inventory is a very significant working capital component for many companies, such as manufacturers,
wholesalers, and retailers. For those companies, inventory management involves management of the entire
supply chain: sourcing, storing, and selling inventory. At its very basic level, inventory management means
having the right amount of stock at the right place and at the right time while also minimizing the cost of
inventory. This concept is explained in the next section.

Inventory Cost

Controlling inventory costs minimizes working capital needs and, ultimately, the cost of goods sold. Inventory
management impacts profitability; minimizing cost of goods sold means maximizing gross profit (Gross Profit
= Net Sales Less Cost of Goods Sold).

There are four components to inventory cost:

  · Purchasing costs: the invoice amount (after discounts) for inventory; the initial investment in inventory
584 19 · The Importance of Trade Credit and Working Capital in Planning

         · Carrying costs: all costs of having inventory in stock, which includes storage costs (i.e., the cost of the
             space to store the inventory, such as a warehouse), insurance, inventory obsolescence and spoilage, and
             even the opportunity cost of the investment in inventory

         · Ordering costs: the costs of placing an order with a vendor; the cost of a purchase and managing the
             payment process

         · Stockout costs: an opportunity cost incurred when a customer order cannot be filled and the customer
             goes elsewhere for the product; lost revenue

       Minimizing total inventory costs is a combination of many strategies, the scope and complexity of which are
       beyond the scope of this text. Concepts such as just-in-time (JIT) inventory practices and economic order
       quantity (EOQ) are tools used by inventory managers, both of which help keep a company lean (minimizing
       inventory) while making sure the inventory resources are in place in time to complete the sale.

      Benefit of Holding Inventory

       Brick-and-mortar stores need goods in stock so that the customer can see and touch the product and be able
       to acquire it when they need it. Customers are disappointed if they cannot see and touch the item or if they
       find out upon arrival at the store that it is out of stock.

       Customers of all kinds don't want to wait for the delivery of a purchase. We have become accustomed to
       Amazon orders being delivered to the door the next day. Product fulfillment and availability is important.
       Inventory must be in stock, or sales will be lost.

       In manufacturing, the inventory of materials and component parts must be in place at the start of the value
       chain (the conversion process), and finished goods need to be ready to meet scheduled shipments. Holding
       sufficient inventory meets customer demand, whether it is products on the shelves or in the warehouse that
       are ready to move through the supply chain and into the hands of the customer.

      19.6 Using Excel to Create the Short-Term Plan

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Create a one-year budget.
         · Create a cash budget.

       A cash budget is a tool of cash management and therefore assists financial managers in the planning and
       control of a critical asset. The cash budget, like any other budget, looks to the future. It projects the cash flows
       into and out of the company. The budgeting process of a company is a really an integrated process--it links a
       series of budgets together so that company objectives can be achieved. For example, in a manufacturing
       company, a series of budgets such as those for sales, production, purchases, materials, overhead, selling and
       administrative costs, and planned capital expenditures would need to be prepared before cash needs (cash
       budget) can be predicted.

       Just as you might budget your earnings (salary, business income, investment income, etc.) to see if you will be
       able to cover your expected living expenses and planned savings amounts, to be successful and to increase
       the odds that sufficient cash will be available in the months ahead, financial managers prepare cash budgets
       to

         · meet payrolls;
         · allocate dollars for contingencies and emergencies;
         · analyze if planned collections and disbursements policies and procedures result in adequate cash

             balances; and
         · plan for borrowings on lines of credit and short-term loans that might be needed to balance the cash

             budget.

       A cash budget is a model that often goes through several iterations before managers can approve it as the

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                     19.6 · Using Excel to Create the Short-Term Plan 585

plan going forward. Changes in any of the "upstream" budgets--budgets that are prepared before the cash
budget, such as the sales, purchases, and production budgets--may need to be revised because of changing
assumptions. New economic forecasts and even cost-cutting measures will require a revision of the cash
budget.

Although a budget might be prepared for each month of a future 12-month period, such as the upcoming
fiscal year, a rolling budget is often used. A rolling budget changes often as the planning period (e.g., a fiscal
year) plays out. When one month ends, another month is added to the end (the next column) of the budget.
For example, if in your budget January is the first month of the planning period, once January is over, next
January's cash budget column would be added--right after December's column (at the far right of the
budget).

Sample One-Year (Annual) Operating Budget

Preparing an annual operating budget can be a complex task. In essence, a company budget is a series of
budgets, many of which are interrelated.

The sales budget is prepared first and has an impact on many other budgets. Take the example of a
production budget of a manufacturer. The sales budget impacts what needs to be produced (production
budget), and the production budget influences planned purchases of material (purchases budget), overhead
resources (overhead budget), and the amount of labor costs for the year ahead (direct labor budget.)

For a merchant (such as a wholesaler or retailer), the annual budget would be less complex than that of a
manufacturing firm but would still require an inventory purchases budget and an operating expense budget
(such as selling and administrative expenses). For a service firm, a purchase budget for inventory would not be
necessary, but an operating budget would be. All businesses need a cash budget, which is the topic of the next
section of this chapter.

The example operating budget presented here is of a merchandising company. Budgets are prepared
following a process that begins with a sales (or revenue) forecast. The sales forecast is normally based on
information obtained from both internal and external sources and predicts the amount of units to be sold in
the planning period--usually one year into the future.

A company's management, in consultation with its marketing and sales executives, would prepare a sales
budget by making assumptions about the number of units that are expected to be sold and the prices that will
be charged. From the sales budget, projections are made as to cash receipts each month, and therefore
assumptions have to be made as to how much of each month's sales will be cash sales and how much cash will
flow into the company from the collection credit sales (including cash flow in from the prior month's sales).
Figure 19.7 provides an example of a sales budget and projected accounts receivable collections and cash
sales for the months of January through December. Keep in mind that projected monthly sales amounts are
not equal to cash collected from sales. Because of sales on credit, some cash from sales lags credit sales as
collections can extend beyond the month of sale. Credit terms such terms such as net 30 (net amount owed to
be paid in 30 days) have to be considered when developing a forecasted cash collection pattern.
586 19 · The Importance of Trade Credit and Working Capital in Planning

                                                              Figure 19.7 Example of a Sales and Collections Budget

                Download the spreadsheet file (https://openstax.org/r/spreadsheet-file1) containing key Chapter 19
                Excel exhibits.
       Sales budgets "drive" the preparation of other budgets. If sales are expected to increase, purchases of
       inventory and some operating expenses would also increase. To meet the demand for goods and services (as
       defined in the sales budget), a purchases (inventory) budget would be prepared. In this example (Figure 19.8),
       the purchases budget shows projected purchases of inventory (merchandise) and the projected payments
       (also called disbursements) for each month.
       Cash outflows as a result of purchases often do not equal the projected purchase amount. That is because
       payments for purchases are usually on credit (accounts payable), and so purchases for one month typically get
       spread out over a period of time that encompasses the current month and the month (or months) thereafter.
       To keep this example simple, the assumption is that the purchases are paid for in the following month (an
       average days payable outstanding of 30 days). However, in other cases, payment patterns may be based on
       other payment periods such as 45, 60, or even 90 days, depending on the trade credit terms.

                                                                                Figure 19.8 Purchases Budget

       An operating expense budget is prepared next and is basically a prediction of the selling and administrative
       expenditures of the company. Notice in Figure 19.9 that in the operating expense budget, cost of goods sold
       (an expense) is not included, nor are noncash expenses such as depreciation. The cash outlays related to
       goods sold, at least in a merchandising operation, are accounted for in the purchases budget (payments for
       purchases of inventory.)
       With the sales, purchases, and operating expense budgets prepared, the cash budget can be prepared. Some
       of the "inputs" to the cash budget are from the sales (collections of cash), purchases (payments), and the
       operating expense budget (cash expenditures for selling and administrative expenses). A sample cash budget
       and a discussion of its preparation follows in the next section of this chapter.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                     19.6 · Using Excel to Create the Short-Term Plan 587

Sample Cash Budget

A cash budget is the last budget to be prepared and is often part of the financial budget (cash budget,
budgeted income statement, and budgeted balance sheet). The purpose of the cash budget is to estimate
cash flows, to help ensure sufficient cash balances are maintained during the planning period, and to plan for
external financing during periods of cash deficits.
When a budget is prepared in Excel, cash budget analysts can play "what if" with different scenarios to see
when cash surpluses and deficits are expected. Cash surpluses means that funds can be invested in
marketable securities to earn a rate of return, while cash deficits mean that financing, such as a line of credit,
will be necessary (assuming forecasts are accurate).
Although the example shown in Figure 19.10 is a monthly cash budget, a cash budget could be prepared using
any useful time elements: weekly, monthly, or quarterly.
One common practice is to use a rolling cash budget. A rolling cash budget is continually updated to add a
new budget period, such as a month's amount of cash flow activity, as the most recent budgeted month
expires. For example, assume that a 12-month cash budget is prepared for a period covering January 20X1 to
December 20X1. Once the month of January 20X1 has concluded, a 12-month planning period continues by
add January 20X2 to the last column of the budget. The rolling cash monthly budget is an extension of the
initial cash budget model, adding one month and thereby always extending cash flow projections one year
into the future.

                                                                Figure 19.9 Operating Expenses Budget
588 19 · The Importance of Trade Credit and Working Capital in Planning

                                                                     Figure 19.10 Sample Cash Budget

Using Figure 19.9 as an example, Table 19.5 shows the formulas that form the skeleton of a monthly cash
budget.

Beginning     This is the amount of cash the company expects to have on the first day of the month. For
Cash Balance  example, in Figure 19.10, cell B2 is the amount of cash on Jan. 1 to start the year (the planning
              period). The remaining beginning cash balances for the months February through December
              are the ending cash balances of the previous month. For example, February's beginning cash
              balance (C2) is referenced from cell B9 (ending cash balance for January).

Cash          These are the projected cash inflows from collections from customers (accounts receivable),
Collections   cash sales, and any other significant cash inflows, such as dividends and interest on
              investments or sale of fixed assets. For example, the Cash Collections shown in the Sample
              Cash Budget (Figure 19.10) are referenced from the Sales and Collections Budget (Figure
              19.7). January's Cash Collections (cell B3) in the Sample Cash Budget are from cell B12 of the
              Sales and Collection Budget.

              Cash disbursements are the projected cash outflows, such as those for operating expenses

Cash          and payment of payables. For example, Cash Disbursements in the Sample Cash Budget for

Disbursements January (Figure 19.10) are the sum of January's payments for purchases in the Purchases
              Budget (Figure 19.8, cell B3) and the January operating expenses (Operating Expenses

              Budget, Figure 19.9, cell B12).

Net Cash Flow The formula for net cash flow is For example, in Figure 19.10, the January Net Cash Flow is
                      calculated in cell B5.

Preliminary   Beginning Cash Balance + or - Net Cash Flow. This is the projected cash balance before taking
Ending Cash   into account the target cash balance to be maintained (minimum cash balance). In the
Balance       Sample Cash Budget (Figure 19.10), the preliminary ending cash balance formula for January
              is =B2+B5 (B2 is the Beginning Cash Balance and B5 is the Net Cash Flow for the month).

Less:         This is a target cash balance that management sets; it is the minimum amount of cash that

Minimum Cash should be maintained by the company (in Figure 19.10, cells B2:G7 and B17:G17).
Balance

Table 19.5 Excel Formulas for Monthly Cash Budget

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                   19.6 · Using Excel to Create the Short-Term Plan 589

Cash Surplus  A cash surplus means that cash can be invested in marketable securities. A cash deficiency
(Deficiency)  means that some type of financing, such as a line of credit or bank loan, will be needed to
              provide enough cash for operations and to maintain a minimum cash balance. This number is
              found by subtracting the minimum cash balance from the preliminary ending cash balance.
              For example, the cash surplus for January in Figure 19.10 is calculated with this formula:
              =B6-B7. Notice that all months in the Sample Cash Budget show a surplus except for August's
              forecast of a deficit, which may require drawing on a line of credit to provide enough cash to
              meet obligations in August.

Table 19.5 Excel Formulas for Monthly Cash Budget
590 19 · Summary

     Summary

19.1 What Is Working Capital?

Working capital is not only necessary to run a business; it is a resource that will expand and contract with
business cycles and must be carefully managed and monitored. The daily, weekly, and monthly needs of
business operations are met by cash. Financial managers understand the significance of net working capital
(current assets - current liabilities) and various liquidity ratios as they attempt to ensure that bills can be paid.
The cash conversion cycle and the cash budget provide additional working capital management tools.

19.2 What Is Trade Credit?

Trade credit is very prevalent in the business world, especially in B2B (business-to-business) transactions.
Many business exchanges (sales) could not take place without trade credit and the credit terms that are
offered. Like any component of working capital, trade credit must be planned and managed. The creditor (the
company granting the credit) does so based on an analysis of creditworthiness and must monitor payments
and manage slow-paying accounts. The debtor (accounts payable) needs to make payments on time to keep a
clean credit history and to take advantage of discounts.

19.3 Cash Management

Cash management is simply making sure you have enough cash to meet expected obligations and for
contingencies (unexpected or emergency cash needs). Excess cash should be invested low-risk and highly
liquid marketable securities. The cash budget is a critical tool of cash management.

19.4 Receivables Management

Accounts receivables are monitored by management with tools such as the ratios accounts receivable turnover
and average collection period and the aging of receivables. The credit managers' mantra rings true: "The
older the receivable, the greater the likelihood that the account will not be collected."

19.5 Inventory Management

Inventory, usually the least liquid of the current assets, presents its own set of management challenges.
Finding the optimal level of inventory is probably more of an art than a science. JIT helps to reduce the
investment in inventory and lower the costs of storage, but stockout costs can be very damaging to
profitability.

19.6 Using Excel to Create the Short-Term Plan

Short-term plans of a business are funded with cash, with cash budgets being a critical tool of planning. The
cash budget takes into account a target amount of cash, factoring in all the motives for holding cash. A cash
budget looks ahead--predicting cash inflows and outflows, allocating for minimum cash balances to be
maintained, and helping management determine short-term financing needed. Although it is the last budget
prepared, the preparation of the cash budget is an important financial planning exercise of companies small
and large.

     Key Terms

accounts receivable aging schedule a report that shows amounts owed by customers by the age of the
    account, as measured by the number of days since the sale

allowance for doubtful accounts an account that contains the estimated amount of accounts receivable
    that will not be collected

bad debt expense an expense that a business incurs as a result of uncollectible accounts receivables
bankruptcies federal court procedures that protect distressed businesses from creditor collection efforts

    while allowing the debtor firm to liquidate its assets or devise a reorganization plan

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                              19 · Key Terms 591

benchmarking the process of performance analysis that involves comparing financial condition and
    operating results against a standard, called a benchmark

bill of lading a document that is a detailed list of a goods that have been shipped; a receipt given by the
    carrier (shipping company) to the seller as evidence that the goods have been shipped to the buyer

carrying costs all costs associated with having inventory in stock including storage costs, insurance,
    inventory obsolescence, and spoilage

cash budget a report that shows an estimation of cash inflows, outflows, and cash balances over a specific
    period of time, such as monthly, quarterly, or annually

cash cycle or cash conversion cycle the time period (measured in days) between when a business begins
    production and acquires resources from its suppliers (for example, acquisition of materials and other forms
    of inventory) and when it receives cash from its customers; offset by the time it takes to pay suppliers
    (called the payables deferral period)

cash discount discount granted to a customer who has purchased goods or services on account (credit) and
    pays the invoice within a certain number of days as specified by credit terms

compensating balance minimum balance of cash that a business must deposit and maintain in a bank
    account to obtain a loan

contra-asset an account with a balance that is used to offset (reduce) its related asset on the balance sheet
    (for example, allowance for doubtful accounts reduces the value of accounts receivable reported on the
    balance sheet)

credit period the number of days that a business purchaser has before they must pay their invoice
credit rating a type of score that indicates a business's creditworthiness
credit terms the terms that are part of a sales credit agreement that indicate when payment is due, possible

    discounts, and any fees that will be charged for a late payment
current assets assets that are cash or cash equivalents or are expected to be converted to cash in a short

    period of time and will be consumed, used, or expire through business operations within one year or the
    business's operating cycle, whichever is shorter
discount period the number of days the buyer has to take advantage of the cash discount for an early
    payment
factoring the process of selling accounts receivables to a financial institution or, in some cases, using the
    accounts receivables as security for a loan from a financial institution
floor planning a type of inventory financing whereby a financial institution provides a loan so that the
    company can acquire inventory with proceeds from the sale of inventory used to pay down the loan; a
    common method of financing inventory for automobile dealers and sellers of other big-ticket (high-priced)
    items
gross working capital synonymous with the current assets of a company, those assets that include cash and
    other assets that can be converted into cash within a period of 12 months
just-in-time inventory inventory management method in which a company maintains as little inventory on
    hand as possible while still being able to satisfy the demands of its customers
letter of credit a letter issued by a bank that is evidence of a guarantee for payments made to a specified
    entity (such as a supplier) under specified conditions; common in international trade transactions
liquidity ability to convert assets into cash in order to meet primarily short-term cash needs or emergencies
marketable securities investments that can be converted to cash quickly; short-term liquid securities that
    can be bought or sold on a public exchange (market) and tend to mature in a year or less
net terms also referred to as the full credit period; the number of days that a business purchaser has before
    they must pay their invoice
net working capital the difference between current assets and current liabilities (Current Assets - Current
    Liabilities = Net Working Capital)
operating cycle the time it takes a company to acquire inventory, sell inventory, and collect the cash from
    the sale of said goods; synonymous with cash cycle
opportunity cost the cost of a forgone opportunity
592 19 · Multiple Choice

ordering costs costs associated with placing an order with a vendor or supplier
precautionary motive a reason to hold cash balances for unexpected expenditures such as repairs, costs

    associated with unexpected breakdown of equipment, and hiring temporary workers to meet unexpected
    production demands
quick payment a payment made on an account payable during a period of time that falls within the discount
    period
ratios numerical values taken from financial statements that are used in formulas to examine financial
    relationships and create metrics of performance, strengths, weaknesses; help analysts gain insight and
    meaning
speculative motive a reason for holding an amount of cash--to be able to take advantage of investment
    opportunities
stockout costs an opportunity cost (lost revenue) incurred when a customer order cannot be filled because
    the item is out of stock and the customer goes elsewhere for the product
supply chain the network of participants and activities between a company and its suppliers and the
    company and its customers; exists to distribute a product or to provide a service to the final buyer
trade credit credit granted to a business, also called accounts payable; allows a business to buy goods and
    services on account and pay the cash at some point in the future
transactional motive holding an amount of cash to meet operational expenditures such as payroll,
    payments to vendors, and loan payments
working capital the resources that are needed to meet the daily, weekly, and monthly operating cash flow
    needs

     Multiple Choice

 1. The term working capital is synonymous with ________.
      a. accounts payable
      b. current assets
       c. equity
      d. current liabilities

 2. The formula for net working capital is ________.
      a. Current Assets - Current Liabilities
      b. Fixed Assets - Current Assets
       c. Assets - Liabilities
      d. Current Assets - Liabilities

 3. When sales are made on credit, which current assets typically increase at the time of the sale?
      a. cash
      b. notes receivable
       c. accounts receivable
      d. marketable securities

 4. Which of the following is NOT a goal of working capital management?
      a. meet the operational needs of the company
      b. satisfy obligations (current liabilities) as they come due
       c. maintain an optimal level of current assets
      d. maximize the investment in current assets

 5. Accelerated Growth Inc. has the following account balances at year-end.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                    19 · Multiple Choice 593

    What is the cash ratio?
     a. 1.29
     b. 1.43
     c. 1.71
     d. .088

6. Which of the following is true of these credit terms: 3/15, n/30?
     a. 15 percent discount if the payable is paid within 3 days of the invoice date
     b. 3 percent discount if the payable is paid in the period between 15 days and 30 days after the invoice
          date
     c. 3 percent discount if the payable is paid within 15 days of the invoice date
     d. 30 percent discount if cash is paid on the sale date and 15% discount if paid 3 days after the invoice
          date

7. When reviewing its budgets, including the cash budget, management of Transcend Inc. have considered
    best-case and worst-case scenarios. As they completed their analysis, it was decided because of the
    possibility of unexpected repairs and unanticipated higher labor costs to add another $30,000 to the
    amount of the target cash balance to maintain throughout the year. The reason for this action would be
    which of these motives for holding cash?
     a. transaction motive
     b. opportunity cost mitigation motive
     c. precautionary motive
     d. speculative motive

8. A large retailer has more than $100 million of cash and cash equivalents on its balance sheet. Which of the
    following would not be part of the cash equivalents?
     a. cash in banks (checking account balances)
     b. US Treasury bond maturing in two years
     c. receivables from a bank that processes credit card payments
     d. commercial paper

9. An account receivable is created when ________.
     a. a customer pays its bill
     b. a company accepts a credit card, such as VISA or MasterCard
     c. a company sells to a customer on an open account
     d. a company sells to a customer only on a cash basis
594 19 · Review Questions

10. Jackson's Moonshine LLC has a receivables collection period of 47 days. Which the following would be
      reasonable conclusions?
       a. Jackson's Moonshine LLC is most likely experiencing serious liquidity issues.
      b. Jackson's Moonshine LLC is most overinvested in marketable securities.
       c. If the industry average is 31 days, Jackson's management should attempt strategies that will lower
            their receivables collection period.
      d. If the industry average is 53 days, Jackson's management should attempt strategies that will raise
            their receivables collection period.

11. Two Way Power Ltd. (2WP) stocks an inventory item, BB3, that is projected to be in great demand over the
      next 12 months. In discussing its sales forecasts with its suppliers, a reasonable estimate shows that 2WP
      could lose about $30,000 of sales in month 3 due to inventory financing difficulties. Which, if any, of the
      following inventory costs would be affected by this development?
       a. purchase cost
      b. carrying costs
       c. ordering costs
      d. stockout costs
       e. none of these costs because loss of sales is not an inventory cost

12. If a company has significant inventory in each element of the value chain, it most likely is descriptive of
      ________.
       a. the cost of goods sold of a retailer
      b. the inventory balances held by wholesalers and service firms
       c. the materials, work in process, and finished goods of a manufacturer
      d. the inventory on the shelves of an e-commerce retailer

     Review Questions

 1. Intelligent Cookies Inc. (ICI) sold $30,000,000 of product in a year that had a cost of goods sold of
     $10,000,000. The average inventory carried by ICI was $500,000. On average, it takes 35 days for ICI's
     customers, such as grocery stores and restaurants, to pay on their accounts. ICI buys ingredients,
     including flour, spices, and eggs, from its vendors on credit, and ICI takes about 40 days to pay its
     suppliers. How many days is ICI's cash conversion cycle?

 2. Shown below are account balances for Electra Engines Inc., a manufacturer. The accounts are shown in a
     random order. What is the amount of net working capital?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                 19 · Review Questions 595

3. Shown below are account balances for Electra Engines Inc., a manufacturer. The accounts are shown in a
    random order. What is the current ratio and the quick ratio?

4. Imagine that these are the cash collection cycles for some well-run companies:
    What types of conclusions can you reach when you see this kind of variability?
    Imagine that those cash conversion cycles are based on this information:
596 19 · Review Questions

     What would be your analysis of the cash conversion cycles based on the above information (inventory
     turnover, accounts receivable turnover, and accounts payable turnover)? Use the worksheet below to
     summarize your conclusions.
     Worksheet

 5. What is the estimated annual percentage rate (APR) of not taking advantage of the early payment
     discount based on these terms: 4/15, n/45?

 6. If you were a credit manager reviewing a potential customer's request for a $20,000 line of credit, what
     would you analyze? Generally, how would the 5Cs of Credit guide your analysis and help lead you to a
     prudent decision to accept or reject the request?

 7. Aspire Excellent Inc. is a book publisher. On March 1, Aspire sells $25,000 of books to Get Your Books Inc.
     (YBI), a large bookstore chain. The sale is made on account with terms net 60. Aspire's customers usually
     take the full 60 days to pay their invoices. The books cost Aspire $10,000 to manufacture. Below,
     summarize the effect on the accounts on March 1 from the standpoint of the seller, Aspire Excellent Inc.,
     and the buyer, YBI.

 8. The financial manager of New England Blissful Dairies, a distributor of milk, cream, and ice cream
     products, has finished the 12-month operating budget. For the month of June, the following projections
     were made:
     June 1 Cash Balance $90,000
     Cash Receipts $300,000
     Cash Disbursement $350,000
     Taking into account an amount of cash that the firm likes to maintain as a target (minimum cash balance)
     of $75,000, prepare the cash budget for June using the format below. Assume that, if necessary, the
     company will draw upon a preestablished line of credit with their bank to be able to maintain the target
     cash balance.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         19 · Video Activity 597

     Will the company need short-term financing?
 9. The sales for Re-Works Inc., a company that fabricates iron fencing from recycled metals, are all on

     account. For the first three months of the year, Re-Works management expects the following sales:

     Based on past collection patterns, management expects the following:

     Also, based on past experience, management forecasts that 5 percent of accounts receivable will be
     uncollectible and will eventually be written off.
     What are the expected cash receipts for March?
10. With the same sales forecasts as in question 9, Re-Works Inc. management would like to implement some
      changes to credit policy and credit terms that they believe would change the collection pattern going
      forward and would lower the uncollectible accounts prediction to 3 percent.
      What would be the expected cash receipts for March?

     Video Activity

How Companies Report Cash Flow
Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/how-companies-report-cash-flow)
 1. Why isn't the net income reported on a corporate balance sheet a good estimate of the increase in cash

     that occurred during the year?
 2. What is the difference between a corporate cash budget and a projected statement of cash flows?
598 19 · Video Activity

Trade Credit and Interest Rates on Short-Term Borrowing
Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/cost-of-trade-credit)
 3. Explain this statement: Accounts payable and accounts receivables are essentially financial opposites.
 4. Accounts payable is often called "interest-free financing." As such, explain why a company would choose

     to pay the amount owed on its purchases of inventory 50 days early. Base your answer on these facts:
      · The annualized cost of forgoing an early payment discount is approximately 16 percent.
      · The company's cost of borrowing short-term on a bank line of credit is 9 percent.

Access for free at openstax.org
20 · Why It Matters                                                                                                                  599

20
              Risk Management and the Financial Manager

Figure 20.1 Financial managers must consider prudent ways to manage economic volatility and the risk it poses to a company.
(credit: modification of "Risk text on Dollar banknotes" by Marco Verch/flickr CC BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline

  20.1 The Importance of Risk Management
  20.2 Commodity Price Risk
  20.3 Exchange Rates and Risk
  20.4 Interest Rate Risk

      Why It Matters

Each year, American Airlines consumes approximately four billion gallons of jet fuel.1 In the spring of 2018, jet
fuel prices rose from an average of $2.07 per gallon to a price of $2.19 per gallon.2 A $0.12-per-gallon increase
in the price of jet fuel may not seem significant, but on an annualized basis, a price increase of this magnitude
would increase the company's jet fuel bill by approximately $500 million.
That added cost cuts into the profits of the company, leaving less money available to provide a return to the
company's investors. Rising costs could even cause the business to become unprofitable and close, causing
many employees to lose their jobs. The financial managers of American Airlines are not able to control the
price of jet fuel. However, they must be aware of the risk that price volatility poses to the company and
consider prudent ways to manage this risk.

1 American Airlines. American Airlines 2019 Environmental Data. Accessed July 8, 2021. https://www.americanairlines.in/content/
images/customer-service/about-us/corporate-governance/aag-2019-environmental-data.pdf
2 S&P Global. "Platts Jet Fuel." S&P Global Platts. Accessed July 8, 2021. https://www.spglobal.com/platts/en/oil/refined-products/
jetfuel#
600 20 · Risk Management and the Financial Manager

      20.1 The Importance of Risk Management

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Describe risk in the context of financial management.
         · Explain how risk can impact firm value.
         · Distinguish between hedging and speculating.

      What Is Risk?

       The job of the financial manager is to maximize the value of the firm for the owners, or shareholders, of the
       company. The three major areas of focus for the financial manager are the size, the timing, and the riskiness
       of the cash flows of the company. Broadly, the financial manager should work to

         · increase cash coming into the company and decrease cash going out of the company;
         · speed up cash coming into the company and slow down cash going out of the company; and
         · decrease the riskiness of both money coming in and money going out of the company.

       The first item in this list is obvious. The more revenue a company has, the more profitable it will be.
       Businesspeople talk about "top line" growth when discussing this objective because revenue appears at the
       top of the company's income statement. Also, the lower the company's expenses, the more profitable the
       company will be. When businesspeople talk about the "bottom line," they are focused on what will happen to
       a company's net income. The net income appears at the bottom of the income statement and reflects the
       amount of revenue left over after all of the company's expenses have been paid.

       The second item in the list--the speed at which money enters and exits the company--has been addressed
       throughout this book. One of the basic principles of finance is the time value of money--the idea that a dollar
       received today is more valuable than a dollar received tomorrow. Many of the topics explored in this book
       revolve around the issue of the time value of money.

       The focus of this chapter is on the third item in the list: risk. In finance, risk is defined as uncertainty. Risk
       occurs because you cannot predict the future. Compared to other business decisions, financial decisions are
       generally associated with contracts in which the parties of the contract fulfill their obligations at different
       points in time. If you choose to purchase a loaf of bread, you pay the baker for the bread as you receive the
       bread; no future obligation arises for either you or the baker because of this purchase. If you choose to buy a
       bond, you pay the issuer of the bond money today, and in return, the issuer promises to pay you money in the
       future. The value of this bond depends on the likelihood that the promise will be fulfilled.

       Because financial agreements often represent promises of future payment, they entail risk. Even if the party
       that is promising to make a payment in the future is ethical and has every intention of honoring the promise,
       things can happen that can make it impossible for them to do so. Thus, much of financial management hinges
       on managing this risk.

      Risk and Firm Value

       You would expect the managers of Starbucks Corporation to know a lot about coffee. They must also know a
       lot about risk. It is not surprising that the term coffee appears in the text of the company's 2020 annual report
       179 times, given that the company's core business is coffee. It might be surprising, however, that the term risk
       appears in the report 99 times.3 Given that the text of the annual report is less than 100 pages long, the word
       risk appears, on average, more than once per page.

       Starbucks faces a number of different types of risk. In 2020, corporations experienced an unprecedented risk
       because of COVID-19. Coffee shops were forced to remain closed as communities experienced government-

        3 Starbucks. Starbucks Fiscal 2020 Annual Report. Seattle: Starbucks Corporation, 2020. https://s22.q4cdn.com/869488222/files/
        doc_financials/2020/ar/2020-Starbucks-Annual-Report.pdf

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                            20.1 · The Importance of Risk Management 601

mandated lockdowns. Locations that were able to service customers through drive-up windows were not
immune to declining revenue due to the pandemic. As fewer people gathered in the workplace, Starbucks
experienced a declining number of to-go orders from meeting attendees. In addition, Starbucks locations
faced the risk of illness spreading as baristas gathered in their buildings to fill to-go orders.

While COVID-19 brought discussions of risk to the forefront of everyday conversations, risk was an important
focus of companies such as Starbucks before the pandemic began. (The term risk appeared in the company's
2019 annual report 82 times.4 ) Starbucks's business model revolves around turning coffee beans into a
pleasurable drink. Anything that impacts the company's ability to procure coffee beans, produce a drink, and
sell that drink to the customer will impact the company's profitability.

The investors in the company have allowed Starbucks to use its capital to lease storefronts, purchase espresso
machines, and obtain all of the assets necessary for the company to operate. Debt holders expect interest to
be paid and their principal to be returned. Stockholders expect a return on their investment. Because investors
are risk averse, the riskier they perceive the cash flows they will receive from the business to be, the higher the
expected return they will require to let the company use their money. This required return is a cost of doing
business. Thus, the riskier the cash flows of a company, the higher the cost of obtaining capital. As any cost of
operating a business increases, the value of the firm declines.

 LINK TO LEARNING

 Starbucks

  The most recent annual report for Starbucks Corp., along with the reports from recent years, is available on
  the company's investor relations website under the Financial Data section (https://openstax.org/r/
  Financial_Data_section). Go to the most recent annual report for the company. Search for the word risk in
  the annual report, and read the discussions surrounding this topic. Note the major types of risk the
  company discusses. Pay attention to the types of risk that Starbucks categorizes as uncontrollable and
  which types of risk the company attempts to mitigate.

In the following sections, you will learn about some of the types of risk that firms commonly face. You will also
learn about ways in which firms can reduce their exposure to these risks. When firms take actions to reduce
their exposures to risk, they are said to be hedging. Firms hedge to try to protect themselves from losses.
Thus, in finance, hedging is a risk management tool.

Certain strategies are commonly used by firms to hedge risk, which is part of corporate financial management.
Many of these same strategies can be used by economic players who wish to speculate. Speculating occurs
when someone bets on a future outcome. It involves trying to predict the future and profit off of that
prediction, knowing that there is some risk that an incorrect prediction will lead to a loss. Speculators bet on
the future direction of an asset price. Thus, speculation involves directional bets.

If you are concerned that the price of hand sanitizer is going to rise because people are concerned about a
new virus and you purchase a few extra bottles to keep on your shelf "just in case," you are hedging. If you see
this situation as a business opportunity and purchase bottles of hand sanitizer, hoping that you can sell them
on eBay in a few weeks at twice what you paid for them, you are speculating.

In the popular press, you will often hear of some of the strategies in this chapter discussed in terms of people
using them to speculate. In upper-level finance courses, these strategies are discussed in more depth,
including how they might be used to speculate. In this chapter, however, the focus is on the perspective of a
financial manager using these strategies to manage risk.

4 Starbucks. Starbucks Fiscal 2019 Annual Report. Seattle: Starbucks Corporation, 2019. https://s22.q4cdn.com/869488222/files/
doc_financials/2019/2019-Annual-Report.pdf
602 20 · Risk Management and the Financial Manager

20.2 Commodity Price Risk

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Describe commodity price risk.
  · Explain the use of long-term contracts as a hedge.
  · Explain the use vertical integration as a hedge.
  · Explain the use of futures contracts as a hedge.

One of the most significant risks that many companies face arises from normal business operations.
Companies purchase raw materials to produce the products and provide the services they sell. A change in the
market price of these raw materials can significantly impact the profitability of a company.

For example, Starbucks must purchase coffee beans in order to make its coffee drinks. The price of coffee
beans is highly volatile. Sample prices of a pound of Arabica coffee beans over the past couple of decades are
shown in Table 20.1. Over this period, the price of coffee beans ranged from a low of $0.52 per pound in the
summer of 2002 to a high of over $3.00 per pound in the spring of 2011. The costs, and thus the profits, of
Starbucks will vary greatly depending on if the company is paying less than $1.00 per pound for coffee or if it is
paying three times that much.

                                 Date               Price per Pound ($)

                                 January 1, 2000        1.09

                                 January 1, 2004        0.74

                                 January 1, 2008        1.39

                                 January 1, 2012        2.41

                                 January 1, 2016        1.46

                                 January 1, 2020        1.50

                                 Table 20.1 Price of Coffee in Select Years,
                                 2000-20205

Long-Term Contracts

One method of hedging the risk of volatile input prices is for a firm to enter into long-term contracts with its
suppliers. Starbucks, for example, could enter into an agreement with a coffee farmer to purchase a particular
quantity of coffee beans at a predetermined price over the next several years.

These long-term contracts can benefit both the buyer and the seller. The buyer is concerned that rising
commodity prices will increase its cost of goods sold. The seller, however, is concerned that falling commodity
prices will mean lower revenue. By entering into a long-term contract, the buyer is able to lock in a price for its
raw materials and the seller is able to lock in its sales price. Thus, both parties are able to reduce uncertainty.

While long-term contracts reduce uncertainty about the commodity price, and thus reduce risk, there are
several possible disadvantages to these types of contracts. First, both parties are exposed to the risk that the
other party may default and fail to live up to the terms of the contract. Second, these contracts cannot be
entered into anonymously; the parties to the contract know each other's identity. This lack of anonymity may
have strategic disadvantages for some firms. Third, the value of this contract cannot be easily determined,
making it difficult to track gains and losses. Fourth, canceling the contract may be difficult or even impossible.

5 Data from International Monetary Fund. "Global Price of Coffee, Other Mild Arabica (PCOFFOTMUSDM)." FRED. Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis, accessed August 6, 2021. https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/PCOFFOTMUSDM

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                   20.2 · Commodity Price Risk 603

Vertical Integration

A common method of handling the risk associated with volatile input prices is vertical integration, which
involves the merger of a company and its supplier. For Starbucks, a vertical integration would involve
Starbucks owning a coffee bean farm. If the price of coffee beans rises, the firm's costs increase and the
supplier's revenues rise. The two companies can offset these risks by merging.

Although vertical integration can reduce commodity price risk, it is not a perfect hedge. Starbucks may
decrease its commodity price risk by purchasing a coffee farm, but that action may expose it to other risks,
such as land ownership and employment risk.

Futures Contracts

Another method of hedging commodity price risk is the use of a futures contract. A commodity futures
contract is designed to avoid some of the disadvantages of entering into a long-term contract with a supplier.
A futures contract is an agreement to trade an asset on some future date at a price locked in today. Futures
exist for a range of commodities, including natural resources such as oil, natural gas, coal, silver, and gold and
agricultural products such as soybeans, corn, wheat, rice, sugar, and cocoa.

Futures contracts are traded anonymously on an exchange; the market price is publicly observable, and the
market is highly liquid. The company can get out of the contract at any time by selling it to a third party at the
current market price.

A futures contract does not have the credit risk that a long-term contract has. Futures exchanges require
traders to post margin when buying or selling commodities futures contracts. The margin, or collateral, serves
as a guarantee that traders will honor their obligations. Additionally, through a procedure known as marking
to market, cash flows are exchanged daily rather than only at the end of the contract. Because gains and
losses are computed each day based on the change in the price of the futures contract, there is not the same
risk as with a long-term contract that the counterparty to the contract will not be able to fulfill their obligation.

 THINK IT THROUGH

 The CME Group

  In 2007, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange merged with the Chicago Board of Trade to form CME Group Inc.
  CME Group provides trading in futures as well as other types of contracts that companies can use to hedge
  risk.

  You can watch the video Getting Started with Your Broker (https://openstax.org/r/
  Getting_Started_with_Your_Broker) to learn how futures contracts for agricultural products such as coffee
  beans, corn, wheat, and soybeans are traded. You will also see other types of futures contracts traded,
  including futures for silver, crude oil, natural gas, Japanese yen, and Russian rubles.
604 20 · Risk Management and the Financial Manager

      20.3 Exchange Rates and Risk

      Learning Outcomes

       By the end of this section, you will be able to:
         · Describe exchange rate risk.
         · Identify transaction, translation, and economic risks.
         · Describe a natural hedge.
         · Explain the use of forward contracts as a hedge.
         · List the characteristics of an option contract.
         · Describe the payoff to the holder and writer of a call option.
         · Describe the payoff to the holder and writer of a put option.

       The managers of companies that operate in the global marketplace face additional complications when
       managing the riskiness of their cash flows compared to domestic companies. Managers must be aware of
       differing business climates and customs and operate under multiple legal systems. Often, business must be
       conducted in multiple languages. Geopolitical events can impact business relationships. In addition, the
       company may receive cash flows and make payments in multiple currencies.

      Exchange Rates

       The costs to companies are impacted when the prices of the raw materials they use change. Very little coffee is
       grown in the United States. This means that all of those coffee beans that Starbucks uses in its espresso
       machines in Seattle, New York, Miami, and Houston were bought from suppliers outside of the United States.
       Brazil is the largest coffee-producing country, exporting about one-third of the world's coffee.6 When a
       company purchases raw materials from a supplier in another country, the company needs not just money but
       the money that is used in that country to make the purchase. Thus, the company is concerned about the
       exchange rate, or the price of the foreign currency.

                                                                     Figure 20.2 Brazilian Reals to One US Dollar7

       The currency used in Brazil is called the Brazilian real. Figure 20.2 shows how many Brazilian reals could be
       purchased for $1.00 from 2010 through the first quarter of 2021. In March 2021, 5.4377 Brazilian reals could be
       purchased for $1.00. This will often be written in the form of

        6 Global Agricultural Information Network. Brazil: Coffee Annual 2019. GAIN Report No. BR19006. Washington, DC: USDA Foreign
        Agricultural Service, May 2019. https://apps.fas.usda.gov/newgainapi/api/report/
        downloadreportbyfilename?filename=Coffee%20Annual_Sao%20Paulo%20ATO_Brazil_5-16-2019.pdf

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                               20.3 · Exchange Rates and Risk 605

BRL is an abbreviation for Brazilian real, and USD is an abbreviation for the US dollar. This price is known as a
currency exchange rate, or the rate at which you can exchange one currency for another currency.
If you know the price of $1.00 is 5.4377 Brazilian reals, you can easily find the price of Brazilian reals in US
dollars. Simply divide both sides of the equation by 5.4377, or the price of the US dollar:

If you have US dollars and want to purchase Brazilian reals, it will cost you $0.1839 for each Brazilian real you
want to buy.

The foreign exchange rate changes in response to demand for and supply of the currency. In early 2020, the

exchange rate was      . In other words, $1 purchased fewer reals in early 2020 than in it did a

year later. Because you receive more reals for each dollar in 2021 than you would have a year earlier, the dollar

is said to have appreciated relative to the Brazilian real. Likewise, because it takes more Brazilian reals to

purchase $1.00, the real is said to have depreciated relative to the US dollar.

Exchange Rate Risks

Starbucks, like other firms that are engaged in international business, faces currency exchange rate risk.
Changes in exchange rates can impact a business in several ways. These risks are often classified as
transaction, translation, or economic risk.

Transaction Risk

Transaction risk is the risk that the value of a business's expected receipts or expenses will change as a result
of a change in currency exchange rates. If Starbucks agrees to pay a Brazilian coffee grower seven million
Brazilian reals for an order of one million pounds of coffee beans, Starbucks will need to purchase Brazilian
reals to pay the bill. How much it will cost Starbucks to purchase these Brazilian reals depends on the
exchange rate at the time Starbucks makes the purchase.

In March 2021, with an exchange rate of           , it would have cost Starbucks

                       to purchase the reals needed to receive the one million pounds of coffee

beans. If, however, Starbucks agreed in March to purchase the coffee beans several months later, in July,

Starbucks would not have known then what the exchange rate would be when it came time to complete the

transaction. Although Starbucks would have locked in a price of BRL 7,000,000 for one million pounds of coffee

beans, it would not have known what the coffee beans would cost the company in terms of US dollars.

If the US dollar appreciated so that it cost less to purchase each Brazilian real in July, Starbucks would find that

it was paying less than $1,287,300 for the coffee beans. For example, suppose the dollar appreciated so that

the exchange rate was                    in July 2021. Then the coffee beans would only cost Starbucks

                       .

On the other hand, if the US dollar depreciated and it cost more to purchase each Brazilian real, then

Starbucks would find that its dollar cost for the coffee beans was higher than it expected. If the US dollar

depreciated (and the Brazilian real appreciated) so that the exchange rate was                          in July

2021, then the coffee beans would cost Starbucks                                 . This uncertainty

regarding the dollar cost of the coffee beans Starbucks would purchase to make its lattes is an example of

transaction risk.

7 Data from Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US). "Brazil / US Foreign Exchange Rate (DEXBZUS)." FRED. Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis, accessed August 6, 2021. https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/DEXBZUS
606 20 · Risk Management and the Financial Manager

       A global company such as Starbucks has transaction risk not only because it is purchasing raw materials in
       foreign countries but also because it is selling its product--and thus collecting revenue--in foreign countries.
       Customers in Japan, for example, spend Japanese yen when they purchase a Starbucks cappuccino, coffee
       mug, or bag of coffee beans. Starbucks must then convert these Japanese yen to US dollars to pay the
       expenses that it incurs in the United States to produce and distribute these products.

       The Japanese yen-US dollar foreign exchange rates from 2011 through the first quarter of 2021 are shown in
       Figure 20.3. In 2012, $1.00 could be purchased with fewer than 80 Japanese yen. In 2015, it took over 120 yen to
       purchase $1.00.

                                                             Figure 20.3 Japanese Yen to One US Dollar8

If a company is receiving yen from customers and paying expenses in dollars, the company is harmed when
the yen depreciates relative to the dollar, meaning that the yen the company receives from its customers can
be exchanged for fewer dollars. Conversely, when the yen appreciates, it takes fewer yen to purchase each
dollar; this appreciation of the yen benefits companies with revenues in yen and expenses in dollars.

THINK IT THROUGH

Projecting Sales in US Dollars

The managers of a firm think that the exchange rate of Japanese yen to US dollars will be

              next year. If the company thinks that it will have sales of 50 million yen next year, how

much will it project these sales will be worth in dollars? What happens if the actual exchange rate over the

next year is                    ?

Solution:

An exchange rate of                  implies that  . If the company expects to have

sales of JPY 50,000,000, it is expecting sales to be worth USD 500,000. If the exchange rate is really

              , this is the same as                . With this exchange rate, JPY 50,000,000 in

sales would be equivalent to USD 415,000. The company would receive $85,000 less from these sales in

Japan than it was expecting, even if it met its goals as far as the number of units of items sold.

8 Data from Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US). "Japan / US Foreign Exchange Rate (DEXJPUS)." FRED. Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis, accessed August 6, 2021. https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/DEXJPUS

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                               20.3 · Exchange Rates and Risk 607

Translation Risk

In addition to the transaction risk, if Starbucks holds assets in a foreign country, it faces translation risk.
Translation risk is an accounting risk. Starbucks might purchase a coffee plantation in Costa Rica for 120
million Costa Rican colones. This land is an asset for Starbucks, and as such, the value of it should appear on
the company's balance sheet.

The balance sheet for Starbucks is created using US dollar values. Thus, the value of the coffee plantation has
to be translated to dollars. Because exchange rates are volatile, the dollar value of the asset will vary
depending on the day on which the translation takes place. If the exchange rate is 500 colones to the dollar,
then this coffee plantation is an asset with a value of $240,000. If the Costa Rican colón depreciates to 600
colones to the dollar, then the asset has a value of only $200,000 when translated using this exchange rate.

Although it is the same piece of land with the same productive capacity, the value of the asset, as reported on
the balance sheet, falls as the Costa Rican colón depreciates. This decrease in the value of the company's
assets must be offset by a decrease in the stockholders' equity for the balance sheet to balance. The loss is
due simply to changes in exchange rates and not the underlying profitability of the company.

Economic Risk

Economic risk is the risk that a change in exchange rates will impact a business's number of customers or its
sales. Even a company that is not involved in international transactions can face this type of risk. Consider a
company located in Mississippi that makes shirts using 100% US-grown cotton. All of the shirts are made in the
United States and sold to retail outlets in the United States. Thus, all of the company's expenses and revenues
are in US dollars, and the company holds no assets outside of the United States.

Although this firm has no financial transactions involving international currency, it can be impacted by
changes in exchange rates. Suppose the US dollar strengthens relative to the Vietnamese dong. This will allow
US retail outlets to purchase more Vietnamese dong, and thus more shirts from Vietnamese suppliers, for the
same amount of US dollars. Because of this, the retail outlets experience a drop in the cost of procuring the
Vietnamese shirts relative to the shirts produced by the firm in Mississippi. The Mississippi company will lose
some of its customers to these Vietnamese producers simply because of a change in the exchange rate.

Hedging

Just as companies may practice hedging techniques to reduce their commodity risk exposure, they may
choose to hedge to reduce their currency risk exposure. The types of futures contracts that we discussed
earlier in this chapter exist for currencies as well as for commodities. A company that knows that it will need
Korean won later this year to purchase raw materials from a South Korean supplier, for example, can purchase
a futures contract for Korean won.

While futures contracts allow companies to lock in prices today for a future commitment, these contracts are
not flexible enough to meet the risk management needs of all companies. Futures contracts are standardized
contracts. This means that the contracts have set sizes and maturity dates. Futures contracts for Korean won,
for example, have a contract size of 125 million won. A company that needs 200 million won later this year
would need to either purchase one futures contract, hedging only a portion of its needs, or purchase two
futures contracts, hedging more than it needs. Either way, the company has remaining currency risk.

In this next section, we will explore some additional hedging techniques.

Forward Contracts

Suppose a company needs access to 200 million Korean won on March 1. In addition to a specified contract
size, currency futures contracts have specified days on which the contracts are settled. For most currency
futures contracts, this occurs on the third Wednesday of the month. If the company needed 125 million Korean
won (the basic contract size) on the third Wednesday of March (the standard settlement date), the futures
608 20 · Risk Management and the Financial Manager

       contract could be useful. Because the company needs a different number of Korean won on a different date
       from those specified in the standard contract, the futures contract is not going to meet the specific risk
       management needs of the company.

       Another type of contract, the forward contract, can be used by this company to meet its specific needs. A
       forward contract is simply a contractual agreement between two parties to exchange a specified amount of
       currencies at a future date. A company can approach its bank, for example, saying that it will need to purchase
       200 million Korean won on March 1. The bank will quote a forward rate, which is a rate specified today for the
       sale of currency on a future date, and the company and the bank can enter into a forward contract to
       exchange dollars for 200 million Korean won at the quoted rate on March 1.

       Because a forward contract is a contract between two parties, those two parties can specify the amount that
       will be traded and the date the trade will occur. This contract is similar to your agreeing with a hotel that you
       will arrive on March 1 and rent a room for three nights at $200 per night. You are agreeing today to show up at
       the hotel on a future (specified) date and pay the quoted price when you arrive. The hotel agrees to provide
       you the room on March 1 and cannot change the price of the room when you arrive. With a forward contract,
       you are also agreeing that you will indeed make the purchase and you cannot change your mind; so, using the
       hotel room analogy, this would mean that the hotel will definitely charge your credit card for the agreed-upon
       $200 per night on March 1.

       The forward contract is an individualized contract between the buyer and the seller; they are both under a
       contractual obligation to honor the contract. Because this contract is not standardized like the futures contract
       (so that it can be traded on an exchange), it can be tailored to the needs of the two parties. While the forward
       contract has the advantage of being fine-tuned to meet the company's needs, it has a risk, known as
       counterparty risk, that the futures contract does not have. The forward contract is only as good as the promise
       of the counterparty. If the company enters into a forward contract to purchase 200 million Korean won on
       March 1 from its bank and the bank goes out of business before March 1, the company will not be able to
       make the exchange with a nonexistent bank. The exchanges on which futures contracts are traded guard the
       purchaser of a futures contract from this type of risk by guaranteeing the contract.

       Natural Hedges

       A hedge simply refers to a reduction in the risk or exposure that a company has to volatility and uncertainty.
       We have been focusing on how a company might use financial market instruments to hedge, but sometimes a
       company can use a natural hedge to mitigate risk. A natural hedge occurs when a business can offset its risk
       simply through its own operations. With a natural hedge, when a risk occurs that would decrease the value of
       a company, an offsetting event occurs within the firm that increases the value of the company.

       As an example, consider a British-based travel agency. One of the major tours the company offers is a tour of
       Italy. The company arranges for transportation, lodging, meals, and sightseeing for Brits to visit the highlights
       of Rome, Florence, and Venice. Because the company charges customers in British pounds but must pay the
       bus companies, hotels, and other service providers in Italy in euros, the travel agency faces significant
       transaction exposure. If the value of the British pound depreciates after the company sets the price it will
       charge for the tour but before it pays the Italian suppliers, the company will be harmed. In fact, if the British
       pound depreciates by a great deal, the company could end up in a situation in which the British pounds it
       collects are not enough to purchase the euros it needs to pay its suppliers.

       The company could create a natural hedge by offering tours of London to individuals living in the European
       Union. The travel agency could charge people who live in Germany, Italy, Spain, or any other country that has
       the euro as its currency for a travel package to London. Then the agency would pay British restaurants, tour
       guides, hotels, and bus companies in British pounds. This segment of the business also has currency risk. If
       the British pound depreciates, the company gains because the euros it collects from its EU customers will
       purchase more British pounds than before.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                          20.3 · Exchange Rates and Risk 609

Thus, the company has created a situation in which if the British pound depreciates, the decrease in value of
its tours of Italy is exactly offset by the increase in value of its tours of London. If the British pound
appreciates, the opposite occurs: the company experiences a gain in its division that charges British pounds
for tourists traveling to Italy and an offsetting loss in its division that charges euros for tourists traveling to
London.

Options

A financial option gives the owner the right, but not the obligation, to purchase or sell an asset for a specified
price at some future date. Options are considered derivative securities because the value of a derivative is
derived from, or comes from, the value of another asset.

Options Terminology

Specific terminology is used in the finance industry to describe the details of an options contract. If the owner
of an option decides to purchase or sell the asset according to the terms of the options contract, the owner is
said to be exercising the option. The price the option holder pays if purchasing the asset or receives if selling
the asset is known as the strike price or exercise price. The price the owner of the option paid for the option is
known as the premium.

An option contract will have an expiration date. The most common kinds of options are American options,
which allow the holder to exercise the option at any time up to and including the expiration date. Holders of
European options may exercise their options only on the expiration date. The labels American option and
European option can be confusing as they have nothing to do with the location where the options are traded.
Both American and European options are traded worldwide.

Option contracts are written for a variety of assets. The most common option contracts are options on shares
of stock. Options are traded for US Treasury securities, currencies, gold, and oil. There are also options on
agricultural products such as wheat, soybeans, cotton, and orange juice. Thus, options can be used by financial
managers to hedge many types of risk, including currency risk, interest rate risk, and the risk that arises from
fluctuations in the prices of raw materials.

Options are divided into two main categories, call options and put options. A call option gives the owner of
the option the right, but not the obligation, to buy the underlying asset. A put option gives the owner the
right, but not the obligation, to sell the underlying asset.

Call Options

If a Korean company knows that it will need pay a $100,000 bill to a US supplier in six months, it knows how
many US dollars it will need to pay the bill. As a Korean company, however, its bank account is denominated in
Korean won. In six months, it will need to use its Korean won to purchase 100,000 US dollars.

The company can determine how many Korean won it would take to purchase $100,000 today. If the current

exchange rate is                          , then it will need KWN 110,000,000 to pay the bill. The current

exchange rate is known as the spot rate.

The company, however, does not need the US dollars for another six months. The company can purchase a call
option, which is a contract that will allow it to purchase the needed US dollars in six months at a price stated in
the contract. This allows the company to guarantee a price for dollars in six months, but it does not obligate
the company to purchase the dollars at that price if it can find a better price when it needs the dollars in six
months.

The price that is in the contract is called the strike price (exercise price). Suppose the company purchases a
call contract for US dollars with a strike price of KWN 1,200/USD. While this contract would be for a set size, or
a certain number of US dollars, we will talk about this transaction as if it were per one US dollar to highlight
how options contracts work.
610 20 · Risk Management and the Financial Manager

The company must pay a price, known as the premium, to purchase this call option contract. For our example,
let's assume the premium for the call option contract is KWN 50. In other words, the company has paid KWN
50 for the right to buy US dollars in six months for a price of KWN 1,200/USD.

In six months, the company makes a choice to either (1) pay the strike price of KWN 1,200/USD or (2) let the
option expire. If the company chooses to pay the strike price and purchase the US dollars, it is exercising the
option. How does the company choose which to do? It simply compares the strike price of KWN 1,200/USD to
the market, or spot, exchange rate at the time the option is expiring.

If, six months from now, the spot exchange rate is               , it will be cheaper for the company

to buy the US dollars it needs at the spot price than it would be to buy the dollars with the option. In fact, if the

spot rate is anything below                         , the company will not choose to exercise the option. If,

however, the spot exchange rate in six months is                 , the company will exercise the option

and purchase each US dollar for only KWN 1,200.

The profitability, or the payoff, to the owner of a call option is represented by the chart in Figure 20.4 below.
Possible spot prices are measured from left to right, and the financial gain or loss to the company of the
option contract is measured vertically. If the spot price is anything less than KWN 1,200/USD, the option
expires without being exercised. The company paid KWN 50 for something that ended up being worthless.

                                 Figure 20.4 The Payoff to the Holder of a Call Option

If, in six months, the spot exchange rate is                     , then the company will choose to exercise

the option. The company will be saving KWN 25 for each dollar purchased, but the company originally paid 50

KWN for the contract. So, the company will be 25 KWN worse off than if it had never purchased the call option.

If the spot exchange rate is                        , the company will be in exactly the same position having

purchased and exercised the call option as it would have been if it had not purchased the option. At any spot

price higher than KWN 1,250/USD, the firm will be in a better financial position, or will have a positive payoff,

because it purchased the call option. The more the Korean won depreciates over the next six months, the

higher the payoff to the firm of owning the call contract. Purchasing the call contract is a way that the

company can protect itself from the currency exposure it faces.

For any transaction, there must be two parties--a buyer and a seller. For the company to have purchased the
call option, another party must have sold the call option. The seller of a call option is called the option writer.
Let's consider the potential benefits and risks to the writer of the call option.

When the company purchases the call option, it pays the premium to the writer. The writer of the option does
not have a choice regarding whether the option will be exercised. The purchaser of the option has the right to
make the choice; in essence, the writer of the option sold the right to make that decision to the purchasers of
the call option.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    20.3 · Exchange Rates and Risk 611

Figure 20.5 shows the payoff to the writer of the call option. Recall that the buyer of the call option will let the

option expire if the spot rate is less than                     when the call option matures in six months. If

this occurs, the writer of the option collected the KWN 50 option premium when the contract was sold and

then never hears from the purchaser again. This is what the writer of the option is hoping for; the writer of the

call option profits when the options contract is not exercised

                             Figure 20.5 The Payoff to the Writer of a Call Option

If the spot rate is above                    , then the holder of the option will choose to exercise the right

to purchase the won at the option strike price. Then the writer of the option will be obligated to sell the Korean

won at a price of KWN 1,200/USD. If the spot rate is                            , the option writer will be obligated

to sell the dollars for KWN 50 less than what they are worth; because the option writer was initially paid a KWN

50 premium for taking on that obligation, the option writer will just break even. For any exchange rate higher

than                         , the writer of the call option will have a loss.

The option contract is a zero-sum game. Any payoff the owner of the option receives is exactly equal to the
loss the writer of the option has. Any loss the owner of the option has is exactly equal to the payoff the writer
of the option receives.

Put Options

While the call option you just considered gives the owner the right to buy an underlying asset, the put option
gives the owner to right to sell an underlying asset. Take, for example, an Indian company that has a contract
to provide graphic artwork for a US company. The US company will pay the Indian company 200,000 US dollars
in three months.

While the Indian company receives US dollars, it must pay its workers in Indian rupees. Because the company
does not know what the spot exchange rate will be in three months, it faces transaction risk and may be
interested in hedging this exposure using a put option.

The company knows that the current spot rate is                 , meaning that the company would be able

to use $200,000 to purchase                                                     if it possessed the $200,000 today. If

the Indian rupee appreciates relative to the US dollar over the next three months, however, the company will

receive fewer rupees when it makes the exchange; perhaps the company will not be able to purchase enough

rupees to cover the wages of its employees.

Assume the company can purchase a put option that gives it the right to sell US dollars in three months at a
strike price of INR 75/USD; the premium for this put option is INR 5. By purchasing this put option, the
company is spending INR 5 to guarantee that it can sell its US dollars for rupees in three months at a price of
INR 75/USD.
612 20 · Risk Management and the Financial Manager

       If, in three months, when the company receives payment in US dollars, the spot exchange rate is higher than
                                 , the company will simply exchange the US dollars for rupees at that exchange rate, allowing

       the put option to expire without exercising it. The payoff to the company for the option is INR -5, the premium
       that was paid for the option that was never used (see Figure 20.6).

                                 Figure 20.6 The Payoff to the Holder of a Put Option

If, however, in three months, the spot exchange rate is anything less than                    , then the

company will choose to exercise the option. If the spot rate is between                and

, the payoff for the option is negative. For example, if the spot exchange rate is

, the company will exercise the option and receive three more Indian rupees per dollar than

it would in the spot market. However, the company had to spend INR 5 for the option, so the payoff is INR -2.

At a spot exchange rate of       , the company has a zero payoff; the benefit of exercising the

option, INR 5, is exactly equal to the price of purchasing the option, the premium of INR 5.

If, in three months, the spot exchange rate is anything below                          , the payoff of the put option is

positive. At the theoretical extreme, if the USD became worthless and would purchase no rupees in the spot

market when the company received the dollars, the company could exercise its option and receive INR 75/USD,

and its payoff would be INR 70.

Now that we have considered the payoff to a purchaser of a put contract, let's consider the opposite side of
the contract: the seller, or writer, of the put option. The writer of a put option is selling the right to sell dollars
to the purchaser of the put option. The writer of the put option collects a premium for this. The writer of the
put has no choice as to whether the put option will be exercised; the writer only has an obligation to honor the
contract if the owner of the put option chooses to exercise it.

The owner of the option will choose to let the option expire if the spot exchange rate is anything above
                         . If that is the case, the writer of the put option collects the INR 5 premium for writing the

put, as shown by the horizontal line in Figure 20.7. This is what the writer of the put is hoping will occur.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     20.3 · Exchange Rates and Risk 613

                        Figure 20.7 The Payoff to the Writer of a Put Option

The owner of the option will choose to exercise the option if the exchange rate is less than                     .

If the spot exchange rate is between    and                                   , the writer of the put option has

a positive payoff. Although the writer must now purchase US dollars for a price higher than what the dollars

are worth, the INR 5 premium that the writer received when entering into the position is more than enough to

offset that loss.

If the spot exchange rate drops below         , however, the writer of the put option is losing more

than INR 5 when the option is exercised, leaving the writer with a negative payoff. In the extreme, the writer of

the put will have to purchase worthless US dollars for INR 75/USD, resulting in a loss of INR 70.

Notice that the payoff to the writer of the put is the negative of the payoff to the holder of the put at every
spot price. The highest payoff occurs to the writer of the put when the option is never exercised. In that
instance, the payoff to the writer is the premium that the holder of the put paid when purchasing the option
(see Figure 20.7).

Table 20.2 provides a summary of the positions that the parties who enter into options contract are in.
Remember that the buyer of an option is always the one purchasing the right to do something. The seller or
writer of an option is selling the right to make a decision; the seller has the obligation to fulfill the contract
should the buyer of the option choose to exercise the option. The most the seller of an option can ever profit is
by the premium that was paid for the option; this occurs when the option is not exercised.

                                                    Benefits                                  Harm
                                                                                                 Maximum Loss
   Party to an Right of Obligation of   When        Maximum                   When               Premium paid
Option Contract the Party the Party                    Profit                                    Unlimited
                                                                                                 Premium paid
Buyer of a call To buy                  Price of    Unlimited                 Price of
                                        underlying                            underlying
                                        rises                                 falls

Seller of a call        To sell         Price of    Premium                   Price of
                                        underlying  received                  underlying
                                        falls                                 rises

                                        Price of    Strike price              Price of
                                        underlying
Buyer of a put To sell                  falls       minus premium underlying

                                                                              rises

Table 20.2 Summary of Option Contracts
614 20 · Risk Management and the Financial Manager

                                                                Benefits                      Harm

   Party to an Right of Obligation of               When        Maximum      When Maximum Loss
Option Contract the Party the Party                                Profit

Seller of a put                  To buy             Price of    Premium      Price of         Strike price
                                                    underlying  received     underlying       minus premium
                                                    rises                    falls

Table 20.2 Summary of Option Contracts

20.4 Interest Rate Risk

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
  · Describe interest rate risk.
  · Explain how a change in interest rates changes the value of cash flows.
  · Describe the use of an interest rate swap.

An interest rate is simply the price of borrowing money. Just as other prices are volatile, interest rates are also
volatile. Just as volatility in other prices leads to uncertain cash flows for a company, volatility in interest rates
can also lead to uncertain cash flows.

Measuring Interest Rate Risk

Suppose that a company is supposed to pay a bill of $1,000 in 10 years. The present value of this bill depends

on the level of interest rates. If the interest rate is 5%, the present value of the bill is        . If

the interest rate rises to 6%, the present value of the bill is              . The increase in the interest
rate by 1% causes the present value of the expected cash flow to fall by                                      .

Interest rate risk can be highlighted by looking at bonds. Consider two $1,000 face value bonds with a 5%
coupon rate, paid semiannually. One of the bonds matures in five years, and the other bond matures in 30
years. If the market interest rate is 5%, each of these bonds will sell for face value, or $1,000. If, instead, the
market interest rate is 6%, the five-year bond will sell for $957.35 and the 30-year bond will sell for $861.62.

Notice that as the interest rate rises, the price of both of these bonds will fall. However, the price of the longer-
term bond will fall by more than the price of the shorter-term bond. The longer-term bond price will fall by
1.38%; the shorter-term bond price will fall by only 0.43%.

Consider two additional $1,000 face value bonds. The difference is that these bonds have a 6% coupon rate,
paid semiannually. If a bond has a 6% coupon rate and matures in five years, it will sell for $1,043.76 when the
market interest rate is 5%. A 30-year bond that matures in 30 years and has a 6% coupon rate will sell for
$1,154.54 when the market interest rate is 5%. However, if the interest rate in the economy is 6%, both of these
bonds will sell for a price of $1,000. The price of the five-year bond will drop by 4.19%; the price of the 30-year
bond will drop by 13.39%.

THINK IT THROUGH

Calculating Bond Prices as the Interest Rates Changes

You are considering purchasing a $10,000 face value bond with a 4% coupon rate, paid semiannually, that
matures in 20 years. If you require a 5% return to purchase this bond, what is the maximum price you

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              20.4 · Interest Rate Risk 615

would be willing to pay for the bond? If, instead, you require an 8% return to purchase this bond, what is
the maximum price you would be willing to pay for the bond?

Solution:

If the bond pays coupon interest semiannually, you will receive one-half of the face value of the bond
multiplied by the coupon rate every six months. So, you will receive 40 coupon payments of

                                    . At maturity, you will receive one lump sum of the face value of the bond. Follow
the steps in Table 20.3 to calculate the price of the bond if you require a 5% return, using a financial
calculator.

           Step  Description                                                   Enter     Display

           1 Enter the number of coupon payments you will receive              40 N N =           40

           2 Enter your semiannual required return                             2.5 I/Y I/Y =      2.5

           3 Enter the semiannual coupon payment                               200 PMT PMT =      200

           4 Enter the face value of the bond                                  10000 FV FV =  10,000

           5 Calculate the present value                                       CPT PV PV = -8,744.86

           Table 20.3 Calculator Step to Price a Bond Requiring a 5% Return9

When your required yield is 5%, the most you would be willing to pay for this bond is $8,744.86.

To calculate the price of the bond if your required return is 8%, use the same process, replacing the I/YR in
step 2 with 4 (see Table 20.4). All other variables remain the same because the characteristics of the bond
have not changed.

           Step  Description                                                   Enter     Display

           1 Enter the number of coupon payments you will receive              40 N N =           40

           2 Enter your semiannual required return                             4 I/Y I/Y =        4

           3 Enter the semiannual coupon payment                               200 PMT PMT =      200

           4 Enter the face value of the bond                                  10000 FV FV =  10,000

           5 Calculate the present value                                       CPT PV PV = -6,041.45

           Table 20.4 Calculator Steps to Price a Bond Requiring an 8% Return

If your required return is 8% to invest in this bond, you will be willing to pay only $6,041.45 to purchase the
bond.

Thus, if interest rates rise because of changing market conditions, the price of bonds will fall.

The sensitivity of bond prices to changes in the interest rate is known as interest rate risk. Duration is an
important measure of interest rate risk that incorporates the maturity and coupon rate of a bond as well as
the level of current market interest rates. Calculating duration is a complex topic that is beyond the scope of
this introductory textbook, but it is useful to note that

  · the higher the duration of a bond, the more sensitive the price of the bond will be to interest rate

9 The specific financial calculator in these examples is the Texas Instruments BA II PlusTM Professional model, but you can use other
financial calculators for these types of calculations.
616 20 · Risk Management and the Financial Manager

   changes;
· the duration of a bond will be higher when market yields are lower, all else being equal;
· the duration of a bond will be higher the longer the maturity of the bond, all else being equal; and
· the duration of a bond will be higher the lower the coupon rate on the bond, all else being equal.

Swap-Based Hedging

As the name suggests, a swap involves two parties agreeing to swap, or exchange, something. Generally, the
two parties, known as counterparties, are swapping obligations to make specified payment streams.

To illustrate the basics of how an interest rate swap works, let's consider two hypothetical companies, Alpha

and Beta. Alpha is a strong, well-established company with a AAA (triple-A) bond rating. This means that Alpha

has the highest rating a company can have. With this high rating, Alpha can borrow at relatively low interest

rates. Often, companies in this situation will borrow at a floating rate. This means that their interest rate goes

up and down as interest rates in the overall economy vary. The floating rate will be tied to a benchmark rate

that is widely quoted in the financial press. Historically, companies have often used the London Interbank

Offered Rate (LIBOR) as the benchmark rate. Because published quotes for LIBOR will be phased out by 2023,

firms are beginning to use alternative rates. As of yet, no single alternative has emerged as the most

commonly used rate; therefore, LIBOR will be used in our example. Suppose that Alpha finds that it can

borrow money at rate equal to                       ; thus, if LIBOR is 2.75%, the company will pay 3.0% to borrow.

If the company wants to borrow at a long-term fixed rate, its cost of borrowing will be 5.0%.

LINK TO LEARNING

LIBOR Transition

Although the basic principles of financial transactions remain the same over time, the particular financial
instruments used change from time to time. Innovation, regulation, and technological advances lead to
these changes in financial instruments. The use of LIBOR as a benchmark rate is winding down in the early
2020s. To find out more about this transition and how it impacts companies, visit the About LIBOR
Transition (https://openstax.org/r/About_LIBOR_Transition) website.

Beta has a BBB bond rating. Although this is considered a good, investment-grade rating, it is lower than the
rating of Alpha. Because Beta is less creditworthy and a bit riskier than Alpha, it will have to pay a higher
interest rate to borrow money. If Beta wants to borrow money at a floating rate, it will need to pay

                         If LIBOR is 2.75%, Beta must pay 3.5% on its floating rate debt. In order for Beta to borrow at
a long-term fixed rate, its cost of borrowing will be 6.75%.

Let's consider how these two companies can enter into a swap in which both parties benefit. Table 20.5
summarizes the situation and the rates at which Alpha and Beta can borrow. It also illustrates a way in which
an interest rate swap can benefit both Alpha and Beta.

Bond rating                                         Alpha                      Beta
Floating rate                                                     AAA                                  BBB
Fixed rate
Rate company chooses                                                  5                                6.75
Swap                                                    Fixed at 5.0     Floating at
Beta pays Alpha fixed rate
                                                                  N/A                                   N/A
                                                                    5.5                                 -5.5

Table 20.5 Example of a Swap Agreement

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  20.4 · Interest Rate Risk 617

                                             Alpha                          Beta
                                                       -LIBOR
Alpha pays Beta floating rate                                                     +LIBOR
Payments and receipts                                      0.75
Net amount                                                                           -6.25
Benefit                                                                                 0.5

Table 20.5 Example of a Swap Agreement

Alpha borrows in the capital markets at a fixed rate of 5%. Beta chooses to borrow at a floating rate that equals
                            Beta also agrees to pay Alpha a fixed rate of 5.5%. In essence, Beta is paying 5.5% to

Alpha, 0.75% to its lender, and LIBOR to its lender.

In return, Alpha promises to pay Beta LIBOR. The exact amount that Alpha will pay to Beta fluctuates as LIBOR

fluctuates. However, from Beta's perspective, the payment of LIBOR it receives from Alpha exactly offsets the

payment of LIBOR it makes to its lender. When LIBOR increases, the rate of        that Beta is

paying to its lender increases, but the LIBOR rate it receives from Alpha also increases. When LIBOR decreases,

Beta receives less from Alpha, but it also pays less to its lender. Because the LIBOR it receives from Alpha is

exactly equal to the LIBOR it pays to its lender, Beta's net amount of interest paid is 6.25%--the 5.5% it pays to

Alpha plus the 0.75% it pays to its lender.

Alpha is in the position of paying 5.0% to its lender and LIBOR to Beta while receiving 5.5% from Beta. This

means that Alpha's net interest paid is      Alpha is said to have swapped its fixed interest rate for

a floating rate. Because it is paying        , it will experience fluctuating interest rates; however, as a

company with a AAA bond rating, it is a strong, creditworthy company that can withstand that interest rate

exposure. It would have cost Alpha           to borrow the money from its lenders at a variable rate.

By participating in this swap arrangement, Alpha has been able to lower its interest rate by 0.75%.

Through this swap arrangement, Beta has been able to fix its interest rate at 6.25% rather than having a
variable rate. This predictability is a benefit for a company, especially one that is in a bit more precarious
position as far as its creditworthiness and stability. The 6.25% Beta pays as a result of this arrangement is 0.5%
below the 6.75% it would have paid if it simply borrowed from its lenders at a fixed rate.
618 20 · Summary

     Summary

20.1 The Importance of Risk Management

Risk arises due to uncertainty. The future is unpredictable. One job of the financial manager is to manage the
risks of both cash inflows and cash outflows. Investors are risk-averse. The riskier a firm's cash flows are, the
higher the rate of return investors require to provide capital to the company.

20.2 Commodity Price Risk

Companies do not know how much they will have to pay for raw materials in future months. The price of raw
materials will change as economic conditions change, impacting a company's cost of goods sold and profits.
Some ways that a company can hedge this risk are through vertical integration, long-term contracts, and
futures contracts.

20.3 Exchange Rates and Risk

Exchange rates are unpredictable. This leads to transaction risk, translation risk, and economic risk as currency
values change. A forward contract is an agreement between two parties to make an exchange at a particular
rate on a given date in the future. Companies can use options to mitigate the risks. A call option gives the
holder the right, but not the obligation, to purchase an underlying asset. A put option give the holder the right,
but not the obligation, to sell an underlying asset.

20.4 Interest Rate Risk

When interest rates increase, the present value of future cash flows decreases. Duration is a measure of
interest rate risk. A swap involves two parties agreeing to exchange something, often specified payment
streams.

     Key Terms

American option an option that the holder can exercise at any time up to and including the exercise date
appreciate when one unit of a currency will purchase more of a foreign currency than it did previously
call option an option that gives the owner the right, but not the obligation, to buy the underlying asset at a

    specified price on some future date
depreciate when one unit of a currency will purchase less of a foreign currency than it did previously
derivative a security that derives its value from another asset
duration a measure of interest rate risk
economic risk the risk that a change in exchange rates will impact the number of customers a business has

    or its sales
European option an option that the holder can exercise only on the expiration date
exchange rate the price of one currency in terms of another currency
exercise price (strike price) the price the option holder pays for the underlying asset when exercising an

    option
exercising choosing to purchase or sell the asset underlying a held option according to the terms of the

    option contract
expiration date the date an option contract expires
forward contract a contractual agreement between two parties to exchange a specified amount of assets on

    a specified future date
futures contract a standardized contract to trade an asset on some future date at a price locked in today
hedging taking an action to reduce exposure to a risk
margin the collateral that must be posted to guarantee that a trader will honor a futures contract
marking to market a procedure by which cash flows are exchanged daily for a futures contract, rather than

    at the end of the contract

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          20 · CFA Institute 619

natural hedge when a company offsets the risk that something will decrease in value by having a company
    activity that would increase in value at the same time

option an agreement that gives the owner the right, but not the obligation, to purchase or sell an asset at a
    specified price on some future date

option writer seller of a call or put option
premium the price a buyer of an option pays for the option contract
put option an option that gives the owner the right, but not the obligation, to sell the underlying asset at a

    specified price on some future date
speculating attempting to profit by betting on the uncertain future, knowing that a risk of loss is involved
spot rate the current market exchange rate
strike price (exercise price) the price an option holder pays for the underlying asset when exercising the

    option
swap an agreement between two parties to exchange something, such as their obligations to make specified

    payment streams
transaction risk the risk that a change in exchange rates will impact the value of a business's expected

    receipts or expenses
translation risk the risk that a change in exchange rates will impact the value of items on a company's

    financial statements
vertical integration the merger of a company with its supplier

     CFA Institute

This chapter supports some of the Learning Outcome Statements (LOS) in this CFA® Level I Study Session
(https://openstax.org/r/cfa-institute-Level-I-Study-Session). Reference with permission of CFA Institute.

     Multiple Choice

 1. Which of the following does a financial manager want to do to maximize the value of the firm?
      a. Decrease the speed of money coming into the firm
      b. Speed up cash going out and slow down cash coming in
       c. Decrease the riskiness of cash inflows and cash outflows
      d. Increase the volatility and speed of cash going out of the firm

 2. In finance, risk is ________.
      a. the same thing as profit
      b. ignored because it is inevitable
       c. thought of as uncertainty or unpredictability
      d. something that financial managers should strive to increase and maximize

 3. American Jeans Corp. purchases a cotton farm. The cotton grown on the farm will be used to make denim
     cloth for the company's jeans. This is an example of ________.
      a. striking a price
      b. vertical integration
       c. a forward contract
      d. an American option

 4. The price that a holder of an option pays to buy the underlying asset when exercising a call option is
     known as ________.
      a. the strike price
      b. the maturity price
620 20 · Multiple Choice

c. the exchange price
d. the underlying premium

5. Which of the following gives the holder the right, but not the obligation, to purchase an underlying asset?
     a. A call option
     b. A forward contract
     c. A European put option
     d. An American put option

6. An American option allows the holder to ________.
     a. exercise the option only on the expiration date
     b. exercise the option at any time up to and including the expiration date
     c. sell stocks, and a European option allows the holder to purchase stocks
     d. purchase stocks, and a European option allows the holder to purchase bonds

7. The holder of a(n) ________ has the right to buy and the holder of a(n) ________ has the right to sell an
    underlying asset.
     a. call option; put option
     b. put option; call option
     c. American option; European option
     d. European option; American option

8. The three main categories of foreign exchange risk a company faces are ________.
     a. economic risk, business risk, and exposure risk
     b. exposure risk, fluctuation risk, and forward risk
     c. transaction risk, translation risk, and economic risk
     d. appreciation risk, depreciation risk, and duplication risk

9. In January, the exchange rate between the South Korean won and the US dollar was     . This means that
                                    . Three months later, the exchange rate was

    ________.
     a. the Korean won appreciated relative to the US dollar
     b. the Korean won depreciated relative to the US dollar
     c. the US dollar depreciated relative to the Korean won
     d. both the Korean won and the US dollar appreciated

10. In January, the exchange rate between the South Korean won and the US dollar was

                          . Three months later, the exchange rate was                   . This means

that ________.

a. it will cost US companies more to purchase raw materials from South Korea

b. it will cost Korean companies more to purchase raw materials from the United States

c. US companies that sell their products in South Korea will find their revenue has increased

d. Korean companies that sell their products in the United States will find that their revenue has

decreased

11. A foreign exchange forward contract ________.
       a. is a standardized contract that is inflexible
      b. occurs when a company swaps its translation exposure for transaction exposure
       c. is a contractual agreement between two parties to exchange a specified amount of currencies on a
            future date

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                   20 · Review Questions 621

      d. states the date on which a trade will take place, but the price for the trade will be determined at the
            time the trade occurs

12. Which of the following is a measure of interest rate risk?
       a. LIBOR
      b. Duration
       c. Translation exposure
      d. Contract inflexibility

13. A swap occurs when ________.
       a. a company exchanges obligations with another company to make specified payment streams
      b. a company purchases commodities from a company in another country, exposing it to both
            commodity and currency risk
       c. a company chooses a local supplier over an international supplier to avoid currency exposure
      d. a company chooses a foreign supplier so that its commodity risk will be offset by its currency risk

     Review Questions

 1. What is the difference between someone using a derivative security to hedge risk and someone using a
     derivative security to speculate?

 2. Explain how vertical integration may be used as a method of hedging against commodity price risk.

 3. What is the difference between a forward contract and a futures contract?

 4. You are considering purchasing a call option to purchase Mexican pesos in three months with a strike
     price of MXN 20/USD. The premium for this call option is MXN 2. Show the payoff you will receive at
     various prices in a diagram.

 5. You are considering writing a call option to purchase Mexican pesos in three months with a strike price of
     MXN 20/USD. The premium for this call option is MXN 2. Show the payoff you will receive at various prices
     in a diagram.

 6. Why are options considered to be a "zero-sum game"?

     Problems

 1. The Olive Orchard is a US retail outlet for high-quality olive oils. One of the major suppliers of olive oil for
     the company is a farm in Greece. The Olive Orchard must pay the Greek farm 5.00 euros per liter of olive
     oil it purchases. The Olive Orchard would like to purchase 7,000 liters of the Greek farm's olive oil next
     year. Currently, it costs 0.900 euros to purchase 1 US dollar. If the exchange rate remains constant, how
     much will it cost the Olive Orchard (in US dollars) to purchase the 7,000 liters? If the exchange rate
     changes so that it costs 0.8599 euros to purchase 1 US dollar, how much will it cost to purchase the 7,000
     liters of olive oil?

 2. International Automobile Parts (IAP) holds a call option to purchase US dollars. The strike price on the call
     option is JPY 115/USD. IAP paid JPY 10 for the option. The spot price is JPY 120/USD, and the option expires
     today. Should IAP exercise the option? What is IAP's payoff?

 3. Global Producers (GP) holds a put option to sell US dollars. The strike price on the put option is JPY 114/
     USD. GP paid JPY 10 for the option. The spot price is JPY 120/USD, and the option expires today. Should GP
     exercise the option? What is GP's payoff?
622 20 · Video Activity

     Video Activity

Hedging at Southwest Airlines
Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/Single_Biggest_Risk)
Jet fuel costs represent a major expense for airlines. Southwest Airlines has been known as the most
aggressive airline when it comes to hedging the risk of jet fuel cost volatility. In this interview, the CEO of
Southwest Airlines, Gary Kelly, discusses crude oil prices in the spring of 2012 and the impact on Southwest
Airlines.
 1. How volatile are oil prices, and how large of an impact does that volatility have on the cost structure of an

     airline?
 2. Gary Kelly states that he sees fuel prices as the largest single business risk Southwest Airlines faces and

     that hedging that risk has become more expensive. Why do you think it became more expensive for
     Southwest Airlines to hedge this risk in 2012?
BMW in the United States
Click to view content (https://openstax.org/r/BMW_US_Natural_Hedging)
While the name BMW may sound German, a significant amount of BMW's production occurs outside of
Germany. Watch this video to learn about this international activity of BMW.
 3. In the video, the potential car buyer is concerned about the impact of the value of the euro on the price of
     the BMW. Why, if he is paying for the car in US dollars, do you think that he is impacted by the currency
     exchange rate?
 4. How do you think opening plants in the United States, and in other parts of the world, provides a currency
     hedge for BMW?

Access for free at openstax.org
Index                            Apple, Inc. 112, 131, 132, 134,                                            Index 623
                                 135, 136, 137, 139, 141, 142, 147,
Symbols                          153, 154, 156, 157, 284, 450        Brokers 22
                                 appreciated 605                     Budget analyst 19
"C&G" Credit Ratings 358         arithmetic average return 453       Buffett 332, 370, 373
(ESG) 53                         arithmetic mean 382                 Bureau of Labor Statistics 77,
(GAAP) 156                       articles of incorporation 44        217
2014 Winter Olympics 491         articles of organization 44         Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS)
3M 288                           assets 134                          18, 79
3M (MMM) 450                     AT&T 514                            business cycle 83
401k plans 9                     audit committee (AC) 48             Business Cycle Dating
                                                                     Committee 300
A                                B                                   Business finance 8

AAPL (Apple) 468                 bad debt expense 581                C
accounting equation 105, 134     balance sheet 536
Accounting Standards Update      Bank of America Merrill Lynch       C corporation 42
No. 2014-09 110                  22                                  Cabela's 184
accounts receivable aging        Banking Act of 1935 10              call option 609
schedule 581                     bankruptcies 580                    Call risk 302
accounts receivable turnover     bar graph 400                       capital 508
ratio 168                        Bass Pro Shops 184                  capital asset pricing model
accrual basis 144                benchmarking 574                    (CAPM) 461
accrual-basis accounting 102     Bennett 284                         capital budgeting 479
acid-test ratio 172              Berkshire Hathaway 332              capital employed 325
after-tax cost of debt 510       Berkshire Hathaway (BRK) 373        capital gain yield 450
agency problem 50                Bernard L. Madoff Investment        capital gains 304
Agency theory 52                 Securities LLC 52                   capital investments 269
agent 50                         best-fit linear regression model    capital market 27
AIG 47                           427                                 Capital structure 9, 508
Alibaba 177                      beta 432, 463                       capitalize 112
allowance for doubtful           Big 5 Sporting Goods 540, 542       CAPM 464
accounts 581                     bill of lading 576                  Carnival Cruises 304
Alphabet (Google) 359            Billion Prices Project 78           Carrying costs 584
Amazon 21, 43, 180, 327, 332,    Billions 9                          cash basis 144
341, 359                         Biogen 332, 341                     cash budget 577
Amazon (AMZN) 178                Bivariate data 403                  cash conversion cycle 570
American Airlines 67, 507, 514,  BlackRock 356                       cash cycle 570
515, 599                         Blue Ribbon Companies 49            cash deficit 551
American Express 579             Bluebonnet Industries 509           cash discounts 576
American Institute of Certified  board of directors 44               cash flow 264
Public Accountants (AICPA) 110   bond call 306                       cash forecast 550
American options 609             bond laddering 305                  cash rate 298
American Superconductor          Bond price 287                      cash ratio 173
Corporation 169                  bond ratings 302                    cash surplus 551
amortization 323                 bond returns 369                    cash-basis accounting 102
AMZN (Amazon) 467                Book value per share 181            Cavallo 78
annual meeting 55                Brazil 604                          CDs 354
annual report 54                 British 608                         Census Bureau 79
annuity 231                                                          CEO 47
annuity due 234                                                      certificate of deposit (CD) 384
Apple 179, 359, 508
624 Index

ceteris paribus 68                 COVID-19 179, 300, 458, 495,     discount window 355
CFO 14                             545, 565, 600                    discounted cash flow (DCF) 341
Chapter 11 bankruptcy 121          CPI Inflation Calculator 77      discounted payback period 489
Chicago Board of Trade 603         CPI, 403                         Disney 450
Chicago Mercantile Exchange        credit 106                       Diversifiable risk 13
603                                Credit analyst 19                diversification 458
chief financial officer 14         credit period 576, 581           dividend 323
chief financial officer (CFO) 47,  credit rating 572                dividend discount model
423                                credit risk 88, 301              (DDM) 325
Chris's Landscaping 104            Credit Suisse 374                Dividend yield 323, 450
City of Chicago 285                credit terms 580                 dividends 138
Clear Lake Sporting Goods 129,     Cuban 263                        DJIA 431
167, 536                           Current assets 135, 566          Domestic corporation 44
Close (closely held) corporation   Current liabilities 136          double-entry accounting 104
44                                 current ratio 172                Dow 30 28, 370
Cloud storage 17                   CVS 455, 456                     Dow Jones Company 569
CME Group Inc. 603                 CVS Health Corp. (CVS) 454, 456  Dow Jones Industrial Average
Coca-Cola 293, 439, 514, 515       CVS Pharmacy (CVS) 178           (DJIA) 28, 370, 399, 431
Commercial paper (CP) 26, 354                                       Dun & Bradstreet 569, 573
common stock 319                   D                                DuPont method 183
common-size 539                                                     duration 301, 615
comparable company analysis        DAL 456                          Duration risk 301
(comps) 323                        Damodaran 185, 367, 368, 369,
compensating balances 578          371, 372, 522                    E
compounding interest 218           Danko 228
compounding period 218             Data digitization 17             E-Trade 22
comptroller 14                     Data visualization 400           e-trail 17
conference call 55                 days' sales 167                  earnings per share (EPS) 321
conflicts of interest 49           Days' sales in inventory 171     Earnings per share (EPS) 176
constant perpetuity 229            dealers 22                       EBIT 324
consumer price index (CPI) 77,     debenture 358                    EBITDA 133
217, 357, 363, 403                 debit 106                        EBITDA (earnings before
Consumer Price Index for All       debt-to-assets ratio 174         interest, taxes, depreciation, and
Urban Consumers: All Items         debt-to-equity ratio 175         amortization) 177
(CPIAUCSL) 78                      deep discount bonds 288          Economic exposure 90
contra-asset 581                   default 286                      Economic risk 607
conversion price 528               Default risk 13, 301             Economic value 30
conversion ratio 528               Delta Airlines 304               Economics 23
Convertible bonds 286, 528         Delta Airlines (DAL) 451, 455,   EDGAR (Electronic Data
core inflation index 77            456                              Gathering, Analysis, and
corporate charter 44               Demand 68                        Retrieval system) 57
Corporate Finance Institute 580    demand curve 68                  EDGAR system 58
Corporate governance 47, 48        Democrats 24                     effective annual rate (EAR) 451
corporation 40                     Department of Commerce 82        effective interest rate 243
Correlation 418                    depreciated 605                  efficiency ratios 167
Correlation analysis 417           Depreciation 114, 131, 323       EMC Corporation 270
correlation coefficient 419        derivative 609                   empirical rule 399
Costa Rica 607                     direct method 144                Enron 51, 303
Coupon payment 284                 discount bond 296                Enterprise value (EV) 324
Coupon rate 284                    discount period 576              enterprise value (EV) multiples
                                   discount rate 214, 235           323

Access for free at openstax.org
equal annuity approach 493      financial distress 521                                                 Index 625
Equifax 240                     Financial examiner 19
Equifax Small Business 573      Financial Industry Regulatory   Giving Pledge 370, 374
equilibrium 72                  Authority (FINRA) 10            Glass-Steagall Act (1933) 10
equilibrium price 72            financial instrument 196        global markets 57
equity multiples 323            financial intermediary 22       Goodyear Tire and Rubber 514
European options 609            financial leverage 508          Google 327, 332, 341
European Union 608              Financial manager 18            Gordon growth model 326
Excel 203, 264, 273, 399, 496,  Financial markets and           Governmental Accounting
553, 587                        institutions 10                 Standards Board (GASB) 102
exchange rate 604               financial risk 196              Graham 373
exchange-traded funds (ETFs)    financing activities 538        graphic user interface (GUI)
9, 354, 356                     firm-specific risk 460          406
exercising 609                  Fisher effect 217               Great Depression 10
expansion 83                    Fitch 358                       Great Recession 367
expected value 397              fixed-income securities 302     Gross 369
expense 102                     floating-rate bonds 287         gross domestic product 219
expense recognition 111         floor planning 575              Gross domestic product (GDP)
expenses 130                    Florence 608                    80
Experian 240                    flotation costs 526             gross working capital 566
Experian Business 573           Foley 17                        growing perpetuity 229
expiration date 609             Ford 304                        growth rate 195, 326
exponential distribution 395    Ford Motor Company 579
extreme values 383              forecast 535                    H
ExxonMobil (XOM) 456            Foreign corporation 44
                                Form 10-K 55, 578               Harding 24
F                               Fortune 49                      hedging 601
                                Fortune 500 425, 434            Helu 353
Facebook 21, 327, 341, 359      forward contract 608            Hewlett-Packard 42
Facebook (FB) 451               FRED 91                         histogram 401
factoring 575                   free cash flow 147              holding period percentage
FASB (Financial Accounting      Free cash flow (FCF) 148        return 451
Standards Board) 144            frequency distribution 392      Houston 604
federal funds 26, 355           future value 267                hybrid form of business 42
Federal Reserve 217, 355, 355   future value (FV) 193
Federal Reserve Bank of New     futures contract 603            I
York 354
Federal Reserve Economic Data   G                               IBM 514
(FRED) 91                                                       IEI 356
Federal Reserve funds rate      GAAP 102                        in inventory 167
(federal funds rate) 288        gains 104, 130                  income statement 130, 536
Federal Reserve System (the     Gates 370, 374                  income statement (net income)
Fed) 292                        GDP 81                          104
Fidelity 355                    GDP deflator 77                 Indenture 357
Fidelity Investments Inc. 459   general obligation (GO) bonds   index 93
Finance professor 19            357                             indirect method 144
Financial Accounting Standards  Generally Accepted Accounting   individual retirement accounts
Board (FASB) 102                Principles (GAAP) 57, 166, 583  (IRAs) 9
Financial analyst 19, 166       geometric average return 452    inflation 76, 78, 215, 356
financial calculator 388, 421   geometric mean 384              Inflation risk 13
financial crisis of 2008 355    Germany 608                     initial public offering 360
                                                                initial public offerings (IPOs) 21
                                                                Insurance underwriter 19
                                                                intangible assets 322
626 Index

intercept 431                      (LLP) 42                          mode 384
interest 192                       linear correlation 420            modified internal rate of return
interest income 287                linear regression 418             (MIRR) 489
interest rate risk 301             liquid asset 216                  Modigliani 517
interest tax shield 520            Liquidity 43, 172, 566            money market 25
internal rate of return (IRR) 486  Liquidity risk 301                money market investments 218
Internal Revenue Service 103       Loan amortization 240             money market mutual funds
International Federation of        Loan officer 19                   (MMMFs) 354
Accountants (IFAC) 110             London 608                        money market securities 25
International Financial Reporting  London Interbank Offered Rate     money supply 217
Standards (IFRS) 54, 57, 57, 102   (LIBOR) 288, 616                  MoneyWeek 284
internet 121                       long-term asset 111               Monster Beverage 341
interquartile range (IQR) 391      loss 130                          Moody's 358
intrinsic value 326                losses 104                        Morgan Stanley 22
Inventory turnover 170             lower-volatility investments 396  mortgage bond 358
investing activities 538           lump sum 233                      mortgage loan 240
investment 192                     LUV 456                           municipal bonds ("munis") 27,
investment grade 302                                                 286
Investment relations associate     M                                 municipal bonds (munis) 357
18                                                                   mutually exclusive projects 491
Investments 9                      Macroeconomics 76
Investopedia 177                   Malkiel 360                       N
investor 41                        management discussion and
investor relations (IR) 54         analysis (MD&A) 157               NASDAQ 360
iPhone 25                          margin 603                        National Bureau of Economic
Italy 608                          market capitalization 322         Research (NBER) 84
                                   market risk premium 464           natural hedge 608
J                                  market value ratios 176           Negotiable certificates of deposit
                                   Market Watch 177                  (NCDs) 26, 354
Japan 92, 94                       marketable securities 566         Net book value 322
Jensen's alpha 466                 MarketWatch 464, 514              net debt 516
Johnson & Johnson 358              marking to market 603             net income 102, 132
junk bonds 286                     Massachusetts Institute of        net present value (NPV) 482
just-in-time inventory 572         Technology 78                     Net terms 576
                                   MasterCard 11, 579                net working capital 567
K                                  Maturity date 285                 Netflix 521
                                   McDonald's Corporation 119        New York 604
KB Homes 514, 515                  McKinley Investment               New York Stock Exchange
Khan Academy 143                   Management 465                    (NYSE) 360
Korean 607                         McKinsey & Company 495            NFLX (Netflix) 468
Kraft Heinz 514, 515               median 383                        Nike 21, 404, 418
Kroger 514, 515                    method of least squares 426       nominal interest rate 87
                                   Mexican peso 89                   Non-diversifiable risk 13
L                                  Mexico 90                         Non-stock corporation 44
                                   Miami 604                         noncash expenses 144
law of demand 68                   microeconomics 68                 noncurrent assets 135
letter of credit 576               Microsoft 42, 155, 358, 359, 514  Noncurrent liabilities 136
levered equity 517                 Microsoft Suite 17                Nonprofit corporation 44
liabilities 134                    Miller 517                        NOPAT (net operating profit
limited liability corporation      mixed stream 264                  after taxes) 177
(LLC) 42                           MM Proposition I 517              normal distribution 394
limited liability partnership

Access for free at openstax.org
O                                price-to-sales (P/S) ratio 323                                          Index 627
                                 price/earnings (P/E) ratio 181
Obama 24                         primary market 21, 360           revenue recognition 108
Occidental Petroleum 304         prime rate 288                   Revolving lines of credit
operating activities 538         principal 50                     (revolvers) 239
operating cycle 168, 574         pro forma 14, 544                Rigobon 78
opportunity cost 221, 577        probability distribution 397     Risk Management Association
option 609                       producer price index (PPI) 77    (RMA) 569
option writer 610                Professional corporation 44      risk premium 462
Ordering costs 584               Profit margin 182                risk-free rate 462
ordinary annuity 231             profitability index (PI) 488     Robinhood 22
outliers 383                     Public benefit corporation 44    Rome 608
over-the-counter (OTC) market    Public Company Accounting
359                              Oversight Board 47               S
owner's equity 142               put option 609
                                                                  S corporation 42
P                                Q                                S&P 500 181, 399, 405, 418
                                                                  S&P Global Ratings 358
P/E TTM 181                      quarterly 54                     Sam's Sporting Goods 479
Par value 284                    quartiles 391                    sample data 382
partnership 41                   quick payment 576                Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) 47
payback period 480               quick ratio 172                  Savings bonds 286
payday advance loan (PAL) 245                                     scatter diagram 418
PayPal 11                        R                                scatter plot 404, 418
Peloton 17, 458                                                   scenario analysis 552
PepsiCo 49                       R 438                            seasoned equity offering (SEO)
percentiles 391                  R statistical analysis tool 406  360
perpetuity 228, 326              rating agencies (bond rating     seasoned equity offerings
Personal financial advisor 19    services) 302                    (SEOs) 21
Personal lines of credit 240     ratios 568                       Seattle 604
Political risk 13                real interest rate 87            secondary market 21, 360
Ponzi scheme 52                  real interest rates 217          secondary markets 320
population data 382              realized return 305, 450         secretaries of state 44
portfolio 396, 458               recession 84                     secured personal loan 240
pound 609                        Refund anticipation loans        Securities Act of 1933 10, 47
PR Newswire 56                   (RALs) 245                       Securities and Exchange
precautionary motive 577         Regression analysis 417          Commission (SEC) 10, 22, 47,
precedent transaction analysis   Reinvestment risk 302            102, 157
(precedents) 323                 Renaissance Capital 361          Securities Exchange Act of 1934
prediction 425                   replacement chain approach       10, 47
preferred stock 228, 343, 523    492                              Securities Investor Protection
premium 610                      report 54                        Corporation (SIPC) 10
premium bond 296                 Republicans 24                   Sensitivity analysis 553
present value 267                required rate of return 228      shareholders (stockholders) 42
present value (PV) 195           required return 326              Shark Tank 263
press release 55                 residual 425                     Sharpe 465
price-to-book (P/B) ratio 322    retained earnings 137            Sharpe ratio 465, 465, 465, 465
price-to-cash-flow (P/CF) ratio  retirement planning 238          shelf registration 360
323                              Return on equity 183             Siegel 362
price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio    return on total assets 182       Simmons 270
320                              revenue 102, 130                 single payment or lump sum
                                 revenue bonds 357                197
                                                                  slope 431
628 Index

Sochi, Russia 491                  Target Corporation 578            US Securities and Exchange
sole proprietor 40                 Tellurian Inc. (TELL) 178         Commission (SEC) 354
Solvency 174                       Tennessee Energy 285              US Treasury bills (T-bills) 286
South Korean 607                   Term loans 239                    US Treasury bonds 513
Southwest Airlines (LUV) 456       Term risk 302                     US Treasury note rate 288
Spain 608                          Tesla 508                         US Treasury securities 513
Special purpose acquisition        Texas Instruments BAII PlusTM     US Treasury Securities 462
companies (SPACs) 361              Professional 197
Speculating 601                    The Great Recession of            V
speculative motive 577             2007-2009 10
spot exchange rate 89              time series graph 403             Vanguard 355
spot rate 609                      time value of money (TVM) 192     Variance 386
SPY 470                            times interest earned (TIE)       Venice 608
stacked area graph 91              ratio 176                         Venmo 11
stakeholder 44                     Tokyo Olympics 504                vertical integration 603
Standard & Poor's 500 stock        Total asset turnover 170          vice president of finance (VP-F)
market index 418                   total returns 366                 14
Standard and Poor's 358            trade credit 575                  video conferencing 17
standard deviation 385             Trade-off theory 521              Vietnamese producers 607
Stanley 227                        transaction exposure 90           VISA 579
Starbucks Corporation 600          Transaction risk 605
State Street Global Advisors       transactional motive 577          W
470                                translation exposure 90
statement of cash flows 133,       translation risk 607              Wall Street 9
536                                TransUnion 240                    Wall Street Journal (WSJ) 24
statement of stockholders'         treasurer 14                      Walmart 359
equity 536                         Treasury bills (T-bills) 26, 354  Walmart Stores Inc. 574
stock buyback 179                  Treasury bonds 27, 357            Walt Disney Company 142
Stock corporation 44               Treasury Inflation-Protected      weighted average cost of capital
stock market crash of 1929 10      Securities, or TIPS 357           (WACC) 509
stock returns 370                  Treasury investments 196          weighted mean 384
stock value 321                    Treasury notes 27                 Williams 263
Stockout costs 584                 Treasury notes (T-notes) 356      Wilshire US Small-Cap Index
strike price (exercise price) 609  Treynor ratio 465                 371
structured settlements 235         Trump 24                          working capital 566
Student loans 240                                                    Working capital management 9
subscriber 45                      U                                 World Bank 80, 359
Super Display Book (SDBK) 346                                        WorldCom 121
Supply 70                          underinvested 217
supply chain 583                   unemployed 79                     X
supply curve 71                    uninvested 217
swap 616                           United Airlines 398               x-axis 400
Switzerland 94                     United States 94                  XOM 456
systematic risk 460                Universal Trading Platform 346
                                   unlevered equity 517              Y
T                                  unsecured personal loan 240
                                   US Bureau of Economic             y-axis 400
T-account 106                      Analysis 82                       Yahoo! Finance 178, 464, 514
T-Mobil 304                        US Department of Labor 79         Yellen 365
tangible asset 112                 US Department of the Treasury     yield curve 297
Target (TGT) 450                   462                               Yield to maturity (YTM) 285

Access for free at openstax.org
                                    Index 629

Z            z-value 390
             zero-coupon bonds 286
z-score 390
