PROJECT
MANAGEMENT FROM
SIMPLE TO COMPLEX

LibreTexts
LibreTexts
Project Management from Simple to Complex

                                  Anonymous
This text is disseminated via the Open Education Resource (OER) LibreTexts Project
(https://LibreTexts.org) and like the thousands of other texts available within this powerful platform, it is
freely available for reading, printing, and "consuming."
The LibreTexts mission is to bring together students, faculty, and scholars in a collaborative effort to
provide an accessible, and comprehensive platform that empowers our community to develop, curate,
adapt, and adopt openly licensed resources and technologies; through these efforts we can reduce the
financial burden born from traditional educational resource costs, ensuring education is more accessible
for students and communities worldwide.
Most, but not all, pages in the library have licenses that may allow individuals to make changes, save,
and print this book. Carefully consult the applicable license(s) before pursuing such effects. Instructors
can adopt existing LibreTexts texts or Remix them to quickly build course-specific resources to meet the
needs of their students. Unlike traditional textbooks, LibreTexts' web based origins allow powerful
integration of advanced features and new technologies to support learning.

LibreTexts is the adaptable, user-friendly non-profit open education resource platform that educators
trust for creating, customizing, and sharing accessible, interactive textbooks, adaptive homework, and
ancillary materials. We collaborate with individuals and organizations to champion open education
initiatives, support institutional publishing programs, drive curriculum development projects, and more.
The LibreTexts libraries are Powered by NICE CXone Expert and was supported by the Department of
Education Open Textbook Pilot Project, the California Education Learning Lab, the UC Davis Office of
the Provost, the UC Davis Library, the California State University Affordable Learning Solutions
Program, and Merlot. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation
under Grant No. 1246120, 1525057, and 1413739.
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation nor the US
Department of Education.
Have questions or comments? For information about adoptions or adaptions contact
info@LibreTexts.org or visit our main website at https://LibreTexts.org.

                                        This text was compiled on 01/05/2026
TABLE OF CONTENTS

Licensing

1: Introduction to Project Management

    1.1: Project Management Defined
    1.2: Project Defined
    1.3: Project Context
    1.4: Key Skills of the Project Manager
    1.5: Introduction to the Project Management Knowledge Areas
    1.6: Exercises
    1.7: Web Exercise
    1.8: Software and Technology Exercises

2: Project Profiling

    2.1: Using a Project Profile
    2.2: Project Profiling Models
    2.3: Complex Systems and the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index
    2.4: Darnall-Preston Complexity Index Structure
    2.5: Exercises
    2.6: Software and Technology Exercise

3: Project Phases and Organization

    3.1: Project Phases
    3.2: Project Organization
    3.3: Using the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index to Measure Organizational Complexity
    3.4: Exercises
    3.5: Web Exercise

4: Understanding and Meeting                    Client  Expectations

    4.1: Including the Client
    4.2: Understanding Values and Expectations
    4.3: Dealing with Problems
    4.4: Nurturing a Feeling of Satisfaction
    4.5: Exercises
    4.6: Web Exercises

5: Working with People on               Projects

    5.1: Working with Individuals
    5.2: Working with Groups and Teams
    5.3: Creating a Project Culture
    5.4: Exercises
    5.5: Web Exercises

                                                  1                                       https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/10146
6: Communication Technologies                                                               https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/10146

    6.1: Types of Communication
    6.2: Selecting Software
    6.3: Exercises
    6.4: Web Exercise
    6.5: Software and Technology Exercises

7: Starting a Project

    7.1: Project Selection
    7.2: Project Scope
    7.3: Project Start-Up
    7.4: Alignment Process
    7.5: Communications Planning
    7.6: Exercises
    7.7: Software and Technology Exercise

8: Project Time Management

    8.1: Types of Schedules
    8.2: Elements of Time Management
    8.3: Critical Path and Float
    8.4: Managing the Schedule
    8.5: Project Scheduling Software
    8.6: Exercises
    8.7: Software and Technology Exercises

9: Estimating and Managing Costs

    9.1: Estimating Costs
    9.2: Managing the Budget
    9.3: Exercises
    9.4: Software and Technology Exercise

10: Managing Project Quality

    10.1: Quality and Statistics
    10.2: Development of Quality as a Competitive Advantage
    10.3: Relevance of Quality Programs to Project Quality
    10.4: Planning and Controlling Project Quality
    10.5: Assuring Quality
    10.6: Exercises
    10.7: Software and Technology Exercises

11: Managing Project Risk

    11.1: Defining Risk
    11.2: Risk Management Process
    11.3: Project Risk by Phases
    11.4: Project Risk and the Project Complexity Profile
    11.5: Exercises
    11.6: Web Exercise

                                                                                         2
12: Project Procurement and Closure

    12.1: Identifying the Need for Resources Outside the Organization
    12.2: Procurement Plan
    12.3: Selecting the Type of Contract
    12.4: Procurement Process
    12.5: Project Closure
    12.6: Exercises
    12.7: Web Exercises

Index

Glossary

Detailed Licensing

3                                                                      https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/10146
Licensing

A detailed breakdown of this resource's licensing can be found in Back Matter/Detailed Licensing.

1                                                                                                  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/95276
CHAPTER OVERVIEW

1: Introduction to Project Management

  1.1: Project Management Defined
  1.2: Project Defined
  1.3: Project Context
  1.4: Key Skills of the Project Manager
  1.5: Introduction to the Project Management Knowledge Areas
  1.6: Exercises
  1.7: Web Exercise
  1.8: Software and Technology Exercises
This page titled 1: Introduction to Project Management is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                                                                              1
1.1: Project Management Defined

  Learning Objectives

    1. Identify the Project Management Institute's definition of project management.
    2. Analyze and evaluate the role of client expectations in a project.
    3. Define project scope.

"Project management is the application of knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques to project activities to meet the project
requirements" (Project Management Institute, Inc., 2008). This simple definition represents a compromise that resulted from
intense discussions within the Project Management Institute (PMI) during the 1980s. One of the priorities of PMI during this time
was the development of project management as a profession. Although debate continues on whether project management is a
profession with an enforceable code of conduct and other traditional criteria for recognition as a profession, the development of A
Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK Guide) and the project management certifications that derived
from these efforts helped promote the understanding and development of the project management field.

The discussion about what should be in the definition of project management included debates about the purpose of project
management. Is the main purpose to meet client expectations or is the main purpose to meet the written specifications and
requirements? This discussion around meeting project requirements was not easily settled. If it is assumed that the project client is
the one who defines project requirements, then maybe project management is the application of knowledge, skills, tools, and
techniques to meet client requirements or client expectations. PMI's definition of project management does provide a good
understanding of project management, but it does not help us understand project success. For that, we must include the client.

Jack Meredith and Samuel Mantel (Meredith & Mantel Jr., 2006) discussed project management in terms of producing project
outcomes within the three objectives of cost, schedule, and specifications. Project managers are then expected to develop and
execute a project plan that meets cost, schedule, and specification parameters. According to this view, project management is the
application of everything a project manager does to meet these parameters. This approach to defining project management shares
PMI's focus on the project outcomes in terms of requirements.

Meredith and Mantel added a fourth aspect of project management--the expectations of the client. One client-centered definition of
project management is the application of knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques to meet or exceed the expectations of the client.
This definition focuses on delivering a product or service to the client that meets expectations rather than project specifications. It
is possible to meet all project specifications and not meet client expectations or fail to meet one or more specifications and still
meet or exceed a client's expectation (Darnall, 1996).

Meredith and Mantel discussed a tendency noted by Darnall (Darnall, 1996) that expectations often increase during the life of a
project. Meredith and Mantel suggest that this is a form of scope increase. A project scope is a carefully crafted document that
reflects the performance specifications of the project deliverables. Defining the project scope and managing scope change is a very
different process from developing an understanding of a client's expectations and managing those expectations. Darnall focused on
defining and managing client expectations as a critical project management skill that is distinct from scope development and
management.

Client expectations encompass an emotional component that includes many client desires that are not easily captured within a
specification document. Although closely correlated with project specifications, client expectations are driven by different needs. It
is possible for a project team to exceed every project specification and end up with an unsatisfied client.

  Highway Project

  The Department of Highways in South Carolina was exploring ways to reduce the road construction costs and developed new
  contracting processes to allow the road builders to bring new ideas for cutting costs. On one project, the contractor proposed
  cost-cutting ideas throughout the life of the project. At each phase, the client accepted many of the ideas and then revised the
  budget. The client promoted the revised cost target of the project as an example of the success of the new process. By the end
  of the project, the final cost was less than 1 percent over the newest target. Although the total cost of the project was almost 10
  percent less than the original cost projections and contract obligations, the success of the project was connected to the new

1.1.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24656
  expectations that developed during the life of the project. Even though this project performance exceeded the original goal, the
  client was disappointed.

The reverse is also true. A project can be late and over budget and the client can be satisfied. Although this may be counterintuitive,
the response of a client to the events of a project is complex and goes beyond the data related in project specifications.

  Biotech Project

  A biotechnology company developed a new drug that proved to have a large market demand, and the team that developed the
  drug was assigned to build a new manufacturing facility to produce the drug. The project manager for the construction
  company that was awarded the contract to build the manufacturing facility managed the project effectively. Every request for a
  change in scope was approved, and the result was a 20 percent increase to the total cost of the project. On most projects, a 20
  percent increase in the project cost would be considered poor performance. For the client's project team, who were accustomed
  to complex projects with a large number of unknown issues that increase the final cost of the project, a 20 percent overrun in
  cost was not unusual. Even though the project was 20 percent over budget, the client was happy. Client satisfaction is often tied
  to expectations about project performance. Identifying and managing those expectations is a primary responsibility of the
  project manager.

Key Takeaways
    According to PMI, project management is the application of knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques to meet project
    requirements.
    The role of the client is controversial. Some clients include meeting or exceeding their expectations as part of project
    management.
    Project scope is a document that defines the work required to complete the project successfully.

Exercises

 1. According to PMI, project management is the application of knowledge, ________, tools, and techniques to meet project
    requirements.

 2. According to Meredith and Mantel, a project should ____ __ ______ (three words) the expectations of the client.
 3. If someone had asked you to define project management before you read this section, how would you have defined it? How did

    your definition differ from the PMI definition?
 4. What aspect of project management was omitted from the PMI definition that is included in the definition proposed by

    Meredith and Mantel? If you were on the PMI decision-making body, would you vote to include it? Explain your choice.
 5. What is meant by the statement "The response of the client to the events of the project may be counterintuitive"?

Client Expectations

    Compare and contrast the highway and biotech examples previously described. Suggest an approach that might have prevented
    client disappointment in the highway project. Include the following in your answer:

        What are the differences between the two projects? Provide a bulleted list.
        Identify the single most important difference between the two projects that affected client satisfaction.
        Suggest an approach to managing client expectations in the highway project that might have resulted in meeting or
        exceeding expectations rather than disappointment.

References

Darnall, R. W., The World's Greatest Project (Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute, Inc., 1996), 48-54.

Meredith, J. R. and Samuel J. Mantel, Jr., Project Management: A Managerial Approach (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2006), 8.

Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK Guide), 4th ed. (Newtown
Square, PA: Project Management Institute, Inc., 2008), 6.

1.1.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24656
This page titled 1.1: Project Management Defined is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

1.1.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24656
1.2: Project Defined

  Learning Objectives

    1. Describe two defining characteristics of a project.
    2. Organize projects within projects.

The Project Management Institute (PMI) defines a project by its two key characteristics. All projects are temporary and undertaken
to create a product, service, or result that is unique (Project Management Institute, Inc., 2008). These two simple concepts create a
work environment that mandates different management approach from that used by an operations manager, whose work is oriented
toward continuous improvement of existing processes over longer periods of time. A project manager needs a different set of skills
to both define and successfully execute temporary projects. Because projects are temporary, they have a defined beginning and end.
Project managers must manage start-up activities and project closeout activities. The processes for developing teams, organizing
work, and establishing priorities require a different set of knowledge and skills because members of the project management team
recognize that it is temporary. They seldom report directly to the project manager and the effect of success or failure of the project
might not affect their reputations or careers the same way that the success or failure of one of their other job responsibilities would.

The second characteristic of a project, the delivery of a unique product, service, or result, also changes the management approach to
the work. A project manager must take time to understand the deliverables of a project, develop a plan for producing the
deliverables in the time available, and then execute that plan.

Projects are also defined within the context of larger projects as the following example illustrates.

  National Energy Plan

  The National Energy Technology Laboratory laid out a plan for a national energy policy that had a clear and identifiable
  outcome--providing reliable, affordable, and environmentally sound energy (National Energy Technology Laboratory, 2001).
  The details of this plan will be revised and updated, but the general goals are likely to remain unchanged. To accomplish these
  goals, the project requires the development of new technologies, complex scheduling and cost control, coordination of a large
  number of subcontractors, and skillful stakeholder management. Development of each of the major components became a
  project for the winning contractors within the larger project of providing reliable, affordable, and environmentally sound
  energy. Contractors for cleaner use of fossil fuels, conservation efforts, and development of renewable energy sources would
  manage major projects. Each project has to develop new technologies, manage a large number of subcontractors, and manage
  the stakeholders at the Department of Energy.

       Each subcontractor or work unit becomes a project for that organization. The project is defined by the scope of work. In the
       energy policy, the scope of work included all activities associated with reducing use of fossil fuels and reliance on imported
       energy. Using our definition that a project is a temporary endeavor that creates a unique product or service, implementation
       of the energy policy would be a project that consists of other projects, such as development of the following:

           Wind power
           Solar power
           Electricity transmission
           Electricity storage
           New nuclear reactor design and installation
           Other renewable energy sources
           Biofuels
           Electric vehicles
           Nonpolluting use of coal and natural gas
           Environmental protection

1.2.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24657
Key Takeaways
    All projects are temporary and undertaken to create a product, service, or result.
    Projects can contain smaller projects.

Exercises

 1. The project scope is the _____ required to complete the project successfully.
 2. According to PMI, all projects are ________ and undertaken to create a product or service that is unique.
 3. Projects can contain ___________ projects.
 4. What are two defining characteristics of a project that distinguish it from a process?
 5. If you were planning to move from your current apartment or home to another location, would this qualify as a project? Explain

    your answer.

Projects within Projects

    Choose a large public works project such as the construction of a new high school. Identify at least five phases to this project
    that could be treated as projects within a project. Specifically state how each project meets the definition of a project, and
    describe the product, service, or result of each project and why it is temporary.

References

National Energy Technology Laboratory, "Reliable, Affordable, and Environmentally Sound Energy for America's Future," The
Energy Lab, 2001, www.netl.doe.gov/publications/press/2001/nep/nep.html (accessed June 18, 2009).

Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK Guide), 4th ed. (Newtown
Square, PA: Project Management Institute, Inc., 2008), 5.

This page titled 1.2: Project Defined is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

1.2.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24657
1.3: Project Context

  Learning Objectives

    1. Identify the effect of organization type on time horizons.
    2. Compare project management and operations management.
    3. Describe the organizational options for managing projects.

The project is affected by the type of organization in which the project is conducted and how the organization is organized to
manage projects.

Organizational Priorities

Organizations fulfill a societal role to meet economic, religious, and governance functions. Local factories, churches, and hospitals
are all organizations that provide some social or community need. Factories create wealth and jobs, churches provide spiritual and
common social needs for communities, and government organizations provide regulations and services that allow for an orderly
society. These organizations have different views of time and each organization develops an operational approach to accomplishing
the purpose of the organization over that time horizon. For example, a religious group might begin construction of a cathedral that
would take several lifetimes to complete, government performance is reviewed at election time, and a publicly owned company
must justify its use of money each year in the annual report.

Organizations operate to effectively and efficiently produce the product or service that achieves the organization's purpose and
goals as defined by the key stakeholders--those who have a share or interest. An organization seeks to develop stable and
predictable work processes and then improve those work processes over time through increased quality, reduced costs, and shorter
delivery times. Total quality management, lean manufacturing, and several other management philosophies and methodologies
have focused on providing the tools and processes for increasing the effectiveness and efficiency of the organization. Historically,
these methodologies focused on creating incremental and continuous improvement in work processes. More recently, organizations
are increasingly focused on step changes that take advantage of new technologies to create a significant improvement in the
effectiveness or efficiency of the organization.

Often, these initiatives to increase organizational effectiveness or efficiency are identified as projects. Economic organizations will
initiate a project to produce a new product, to introduce or revamp work processes to significantly reduce product costs, or to
merge with other organizations to reduce competition or lower costs and generate additional profits. A social organization, such as a
hospital, may build a new wing, introduce a new service, or design new work processes to reduce costs. A government organization
may introduce a new software program that handles public records more efficiently, build a new road to reduce congestion, or
combine departments to reduce costs.

Each of the initiatives meets our definition of a project. Each is a temporary endeavor and produces a unique product or service.
Managing these projects effectively entails applying project management knowledge, skills, and tools.

Operations Management versus Project Management

One way to improve understanding of project management is to contrast project management with operations management.
Whether in an economic, socioreligious, or government organization, managers are charged with effectively and efficiently
achieving the purpose of the organization. Typically, a manager of an economic organization focuses on maximizing profits and
stockholder value. Leaders with socioreligious organizations focus on effective and efficient delivery of a service to a community
or constituency, and governmental managers are focused on meeting goals established by governmental leaders.

Operations managers focus on the work processes of the operation. More effective work processes will produce a better product or
service, and a more efficient work process will reduce costs. Operations managers analyze work processes and explore
opportunities to make improvements. Total quality management, continuous process improvement, lean manufacturing, and other
aspects of the quality movement provide tools and techniques for examining organizational culture and work processes to create a
more effective and efficient organization. Operations managers are process focused, oriented toward capturing and standardizing
improvement to work processes and creating an organizational culture focused on the long-term goals of the organization.

1.3.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24658
Project managers focus on the goals of the project. Project success is connected to achieving the project goals within the project
timeline. Project managers are goal directed and time sensitive. Project managers apply project management tools and techniques
to clearly define the project goals, develop an execution plan to meet those goals, and meet the milestones and end date of the
project.

An operations manager may invest $10,000 to improve a work process that saves $3,000 a year. Over a five-year period, the
operations manager improved the profitability of the operations by $5,000 and will continue to save $3,000 every year. The project
manager of a one-year project could not generate the savings to justify this kind of process improvement and would not invest
resources to explore this type of savings.

An operations manager creates a culture to focus on the long-term health of the organization. Operations managers build teams
over time that focus on standardizing and improving work processes, that search for and nurture team members who will "fit in,"
and that contribute to both the effectiveness of the team and the team culture. Project managers create a team that is goal focused
and energized around the success of the project. Project team members know that the project assignment is temporary because the
project, by definition, is temporary. Project team members are often members of organizational teams that have a larger potential to
affect long-term advancement potential. Project managers create clear goals and clear expectations for team members and tie
project success to the overall success of the organization. Operations managers are long-term focused and process oriented. Project
managers are goal directed and milestone oriented.

Organizing to Manage Projects

Because project management is different from operations management, projects are handled best by people who are trained in
project management. This expertise can be obtained by hiring an outside consulting firm that specializes in project management or
by developing an in-house group.

Some organizations are designed to execute projects. Often entities contract with engineering and construction companies to design
and build their facilities or hire software companies to develop a software solution. The major work processes within these
organizations are designed to support the acquisition and execution of projects. Functional departments such as estimating,
scheduling, and procurement create and maintain core competencies designed to support projects. The ability of these types of
organizations to successfully manage projects becomes a competitive advantage in the marketplace.

Organizations designed to produce products or services also use projects. Major activities outside the normal work of the
organization's department or functional units or major activities that cross functional boundaries become a project (a temporary
task undertaken to create a product or service that is unique). As economic pressures increase the speed in which organizations
must change and adapt to new environmental conditions, leaders are increasingly chartering projects to enable the organization to
more quickly adapt. The application of a project management approach increases the likelihood of success as organizations charter
a project to facilitate organizational change, to increase the development and introduction of new products or support the merger or
divesture of organizational units.

Project management offices (PMOs) have emerged to facilitate development of organizational knowledge, skills, and tools to
internally charter and manage projects within the organization. The PMO varies in structure and responsibility depending on the
project management approach of the parent organization. On one end of the spectrum, the PMO has complete responsibility for
projects within an organization from the criteria and selection of appropriate projects to accountability for project performance. In
organizations that make a large investment in the PMO, a large number of new product or process improvement projects are
submitted, and the project office develops a portfolio of projects to manage over a given period that maximizes the use of
organizational resources and provides the greatest return to the organization.

PMOs can provide various functions for an organization. Some possible functions include the following:

    Project management. Some organizations maintain the project manager within the PMO, assign project managers from other
    departments, procure contract project managers, or practice a combination of all three.
    Center of excellence. The project office can maintain the organization's project management policies and procedures, maintain a
    historical database, maintain best practices, and provide training and specialized expertise when needed.
    Portfolio management. The project office actually supervises the project managers and monitors project performance. Portfolio
    management also includes prioritizing projects on the basis of value to the organization and maintains an inventory of projects.

1.3.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24658
    Portfolio management balances the number and type of projects to create the greatest return from the entire portfolio of
    projects.
    Functional support. The project office maintains project management expertise to support the project. Estimating, project
    scheduling, and project cost analysis are examples of functional support.

Key Takeaways
    The purpose of an organization can affect its view of the time allowed for projects.
    In an organization, project management can be used to make step changes to take advantage of new technologies or make
    significant improvements in effectiveness or efficiency.
    Operations managers are long-term focused and process oriented. Project managers are goal directed and milestone oriented.
    Projects can be handled by outside contractors or by an internal group in a PMO.

Exercises

 1. The type of organization can influence the ____ frame allowed for projects.
 2. Operations managers are focused on __________, while project managers are focused on the goals of the project.
 3. If projects are routinely handled internally, the group that manages the projects might be called the ______ ______ _____ (three

    words).
 4. A friend of yours has a forty-five-minute commute to work. She decides to spend some time evaluating the different options she

    has for routes and possible carpooling to reduce the cost or time it takes to get to work. Is this task an example of something
    that uses the skills of an operations manager, or does it need the additional skills of a project manager? Explain your answer and
    refer to the definitions provided.
 5. Business managers focus on improving efficiency and effectiveness, but sometimes they use a project management approach to
    make significant changes. What often prompts them to use the project management approach? What would be an example?

Operations versus Project Management

The manager of a sales department must meet annual sales goals, manage personnel in the department, and develop and deliver
product training for clients. How is this type of operations management different from project management? Address each of the
following issues in your answer:

    How is the relationship between the operations manager and the sales staff different from the relationship between a project
    manager and the project team members?
    Which of the duties described above is most like project management and might be contracted to an outside firm?
    What is the biggest difference between project management and the sales manager's job?

This page titled 1.3: Project Context is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

1.3.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24658
1.4: Key Skills of the Project Manager

  Learning Objectives

    1. Identify necessary operational leadership skills.
    2. Identify additional leadership skills required of a project manager.

Every project is unique, and most projects will encounter unexpected technical challenges. Each project management team is a
group of individuals who need motivation and coordination. Planning is vital, but the ability to adapt to changes and work with
people to overcome challenges is just as necessary. A project manager must master the skills that are necessary to be successful in
this environment.

Operational Management Skills

Often the difference between the project that succeeds and the project that fails is the leadership of the project manager. The
leadership skills needed by the successful project manager include all the skills needed by operations managers of organizations.
These skills include:

    Good communication
    Team building
    Planning
    Expediting
    Motivating
    Political sensitivity

Project Management Skills

Because project managers generally operate in a project environment that is more time sensitive and goal driven, the successful
project manager requires additional knowledge, skills, and abilities.

Albert Einsiedel (Einsiedel, 1987) discussed leader-sensitive projects and defined five characteristics of an effective project leader.
These characteristics were chosen based on some assumptions about projects. These characteristics include the project
environment, which is often a matrix organization that results in role ambiguity, role conflict, and role erosion. The project
environment is often a fluid environment where decisions are made with little information. In this environment, the five
characteristics of an effective project leader include the following:

    Credibility
    Creativity as a problem solver
    Tolerance for ambiguity
    Flexibility in management style
    Effectiveness in communicating

Hans Thamhain (Thamhain, 1991) researched the training of project managers and, based on the finding, categorized project
management into interpersonal, technical, and administrative skills:

    Interpersonal skills. These skills include providing direction, communicating, assisting with problem solving, and dealing
    effectively with people without having authority.
    Technical expertise. Technical knowledge gives the project manager the creditability to provide leadership on a technically
    based project, the ability to understand important aspects of the project, and the ability to communicate in the language of the
    technicians.
    Administrative skills. These skills include planning, organizing, and controlling the work.

Thamhain's work provides a taxonomy for better understanding the skills needed by project managers.

Traditionally, the project manager has been trained in skills such as developing and managing the project scope, estimating,
scheduling, decision making, and team building. Although the level of skills needed by the project manager depends largely on the

1.4.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24659
project profile, increasingly the people skills of the project manager are becoming more important. The skills to build a high-
performing team, manage client expectations, and develop a clear vision of project success are the type of skills needed by project
managers on more complex projects. "To say Joe is a good project manager except he lacks good people skills is like saying he's a
good electrical engineer but doesn't really understand electricity" (Darnall, 1997).

Key Takeaways
    Project managers need the same skills as an operations manager, such as good communications, team building, planning,
    expediting, motivating, and political sensitivity.
    Project managers need additional skills in establishing credibility, creative problem solving, tolerance for ambiguity, flexible
    management, and very good people skills.

Exercises

 1. Project managers need the same skills as an operations manager, including communications, team building, planning,
    expediting, and _______ sensitivity.

 2. In addition to the skills needed by an operations manager, a project manager needs to establish credibility, solve problems
    creatively, have a tolerance for ____________, be flexible, and have good people skills.

Personal Leadership Inventory

Rate your personal project management skills using the following scale:

    S Strong
    M Moderate
    I Improvement needed

Operational management skills:

 1. Good communication
 2. Team building
 3. Planning
 4. Expediting
 5. Motivating others
 6. Sensitive to the politics of a situation

Additional project management skills:

 7. Establish credibility with others
 8. Find creative solutions to problems
 9. Tolerate ambiguity
10. Use a flexible management style--adapt your management style to changing situations

References

Darnall, R. W., "The Emerging Role of the Project Manager," PMI Journal (1997): 64.

Einsiedel, A. A., "Profile of Effective Project Managers," Project Management Journal 18 (1987): 5.

Thamhain, H. J., "Developing Project Management Skills," Project Management Journal 22 (1991): 3.

This page titled 1.4: Key Skills of the Project Manager is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

1.4.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24659
1.5: Introduction to the Project Management Knowledge Areas

  Learning Objectives

    1. Identify the tasks performed in a project start-up.
    2. Describe the areas of project management knowledge as defined by the Project Management Institute.

Projects are divided into components, and a project manager must be knowledgeable in each area. Each of these areas of
knowledge will be explored in more depth in subsequent chapters.

Project Start-Up and Integration

The start-up of a project is similar to the start-up of a new organization. The project leader develops the project infrastructure used
to design and execute the project. The project management team must develop alignment among the major stakeholders--those
who have a share or interest--on the project during the early phases or definition phases of the project. The project manager will
conduct one or more kickoff meetings or alignment sessions to bring the various parties of the project together and begin the
project team building required to operate efficiently during the project.

During project start-up, the project management team refines the scope of work and develops a preliminary schedule and
conceptual budget. The project team builds a plan for executing the project based on the project profile. The plan for developing
and tracking the detailed schedule, the procurement plan, and the plan for building the budget and estimating and tracking costs are
developed during the start-up. The plans for information technology, communication, and tracking client satisfaction are all
developed during the start-up phase of the project.

Flowcharts, diagrams, and responsibility matrices are tools to capture the work processes associated with executing the project
plan. The first draft of the project procedures manual captures the historic and intuitional knowledge that team members bring to
the project. The development and review of these procedures and work processes contribute to the development of the
organizational structure of the project.

This is typically an exciting time on a project where all things are possible. The project management team is working many hours
developing the initial plan, staffing the project, and building relationships with the client. The project manager sets the tone of the
project and sets expectations for each of the project team members. The project start-up phase on complex projects can be chaotic,
and until plans are developed, the project manager becomes the source of information and direction. The project manager creates
an environment that encourages team members to fully engage in the project and encourages innovative approaches to developing
the project plan.

Project Scope

The project scope is a document that defines the parameters--factors that define a system and determine its behavior--of the
project, what work is done within the boundaries of the project, and the work that is outside the project boundaries. The scope of
work (SOW) is typically a written document that defines what work will be accomplished by the end of the project--the
deliverables of the project. The project scope defines what will be done, and the project execution plan defines how the work will
be accomplished.

No template works for all projects. Some projects have a very detailed scope of work, and some have a short summary document.
The quality of the scope is measured by the ability of the project manager and project stakeholders to develop and maintain a
common understanding of what products or services the project will deliver. The size and detail of the project scope is related to the
complexity profile of the project. A more complex project often requires a more detailed and comprehensive scope document.

According to the Project Management Institute (Project Management Institute, Inc., 2008), the scope statement should include the
following:

    Description of the scope
    Product acceptance criteria
    Project deliverables

1.5.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24660
    Project exclusions
    Project constraints
    Project assumptions

The scope document is the basis for agreement by all parties. A clear project scope document is also critical to managing change on
a project. Since the project scope reflects what work will be accomplished on the project, any change in expectations that is not
captured and documented creates the opportunity for confusion. One of the most common trends on projects is the incremental
expansion in the project scope. This trend is labeled scope creep. Scope creep threatens the success of a project because the small
increases in scope require additional resources that were not in the plan. Increasing the scope of the project is a common
occurrence, and adjustments are made to the project budget and schedule to account for these changes. Scope creep occurs when
these changes are not recognized or not managed. The ability of a project manager to identify potential changes is often related to
the quality of the scope documents.

Events do occur that require the scope of the project to change. Changes in the marketplace may require change in a product design
or the timing of the product delivery. Changes in the client's management team or the financial health of the client may also result
in changes in the project scope. Changes in the project schedule, budget, or product quality will have an effect on the project plan.
Generally, the later in the project the change occurs, the greater the increase to the project costs. Establishing a change management
system for the project that captures changes to the project scope and assures that these changes are authorized by the appropriate
level of management in the client's organization is the responsibility of the project manager. The project manager also analyzes the
cost and schedule impact of these changes and adjusts the project plan to reflect the changes authorized by the client. Changes to
the scope can cause costs to increase or decrease.

Project Schedule and Time Management

The definition of project success often includes completing the project on time. The development and management of a project
schedule that will complete the project on time is a primary responsibility of the project manager, and completing the project on
time requires the development of a realistic plan and the effective management of the plan. On smaller projects, project managers
may lead the development of the project plan and build a schedule to meet that plan. On larger and more complex projects, a
project controls team that focuses on both costs and schedule planning and controlling functions will assist the project management
team in developing the plan and tracking progress against the plan.

To develop the project schedule, the project team does an analysis of the project scope, contract, and other information that helps
the team define the project deliverables. Based on this information, the project team develops a milestone schedule. The milestone
schedule establishes key dates throughout the life of a project that must be met for the project to finish on time. The key dates are
often established to meet contractual obligations or established intervals that will reflect appropriate progress for the project. For
less complex projects, a milestone schedule may be sufficient for tracking the progress of the project. For more complex projects, a
more detailed schedule is required.

To develop a more detailed schedule, the project team first develops a work breakdown structure (WBS)--a description of tasks
arranged in layers of detail. Although the project scope is the primary document for developing the WBS, the WBS incorporates all
project deliverables and reflects any documents or information that clarifies the project deliverables. From the WBS, a project plan
is developed. The project plan lists the activities that are needed to accomplish the work identified in the WBS. The more detailed
the WBS, the more activities that are identified to accomplish the work.

After the project team identifies the activities, the team then sequences the activities according to the order in which the activities
are to be accomplished. An outcome from the work process is the project logic diagram. The logic diagram represents the logical
sequence of the activities needed to complete the project. The next step in the planning process is to develop an estimation of the
time it will take to accomplish each activity or the activity duration. Some activities must be done sequentially, and some activities
can be done concurrently. The planning process creates a project schedule by scheduling activities in a way that effectively and
efficiently uses project resources and completes the project in the shortest time.

On larger projects, several paths are created that represent a sequence of activities from the beginning to the end of the project. The
longest path to the completion of the project is the critical path. If the critical path takes less time than is allowed by the client to
complete the project, the project has a positive total float or project slack. If the client's project completion date precedes the

1.5.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24660
calculated critical path end date, the project has a negative float. Understanding and managing activities on the critical path is an
important project management skill.

To successfully manage a project, the project manager must also know how to accelerate a schedule to compensate for
unanticipated events that delay critical activities. Compressing--crashing--the schedule is a term used to describe the techniques
used to shorten the project schedule. During the life of the project, scheduling conflicts often occur, and the project manager is
responsible for reducing these conflicts while maintaining project quality and meeting cost goals.

Project Costs

The definition of project success often includes completing the project within budget. Developing and controlling a project budget
that will accomplish the project objectives is a critical project management skill. Although clients expect the project to be executed
efficiently, cost pressures vary on projects. On some projects, the project completion or end date is the largest contributor to the
project complexity. The development of a new drug to address a critical health issue, the production of a new product that will
generate critical cash flow for a company, and the competitive advantage for a company to be first in the marketplace with a new
technology are examples of projects with schedule pressures that override project costs.

The accuracy of the project budget is related to the amount of information known by the project team. In the early stages of the
project, the amount of information needed to develop a detailed budget is often missing. To address the lack of information, the
project team develops different levels of project budget estimates. The conceptual estimate (or "ballpark estimate") is developed
with the least amount of knowledge. The major input into the conceptual estimate is expert knowledge or past experience. A project
manager who has executed a similar project in the past can use those costs to estimate the costs of the current project.

When more information is known, the project team can develop a rough order of magnitude (ROM) estimate. Additional
information such as the approximate square feet of a building, the production capacity of a plant, and the approximate number of
hours needed to develop a software program can provide a basis for providing a ROM estimate. After a project design is more
complete, a project detailed estimate can be developed. When the project team knows the number of rooms, the type of materials,
and the building location of a home, the project team can provide a detailed estimate. A detailed estimate is not a bid.

The cost of the project is tracked relative to the progress of the work and the estimate for accomplishing that work. Based on the
cost estimate, the cost of the work performed is compared against the cost budgeted for that work. If the cost is significantly higher
or lower, the project team explores reasons for the difference between expected costs and actual costs.

Project costs may deviate from the budget because the prices in the marketplace were different from what was expected. For
example, the estimated costs for lumber on a housing project may be higher than budgeted or the hourly cost for labor may be
lower than budgeted. Project costs may also deviate based on project performance. For example, the project team estimated that the
steel design for a bridge over the Hudson River would take 800 labor hours, but 846 hours were actually expended. The project
team captures the deviation between costs budgeted for work and the actual cost for work, revises the estimate as needed, and takes
corrective action if the deviation appears to reflect a trend.

The project manager is responsible for assuring that the project team develops cost estimates based on the best information
available and revises those estimates as new or better information becomes available. The project manager is also responsible for
tracking costs against the budget and conducting an analysis when project costs deviate significantly from the project estimate. The
project manager then takes appropriate corrective action to assure that project performance matches the revised project plan.

Project Quality

Project quality focuses on the end product or service deliverables that reflect the purpose of the project. The project manager is
responsible for developing a project execution approach that provides for a clear understanding of the expected project deliverables
and the quality specifications. The project manager of a housing construction project not only needs to understand which rooms in
the house will be carpeted but also what grade of carpet is needed. A room with a high volume of traffic will need a high-grade
carpet.

The project manager is responsible for developing a project quality plan that defines the quality expectations and assures that the
specifications and expectations are met. Developing a good understanding of the project deliverables through documenting
specifications and expectations is critical to a good quality plan. The processes for assuring that the specifications and expectations

1.5.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24660
are met are integrated into the project execution plan. Just as the project budget and completion dates may change over the life of a
project, the project specifications may also change. Changes in quality specifications are typically managed in the same process as
cost or schedule changes. The impact of the changes is analyzed for impact on cost and schedule, and with appropriate approvals,
changes are made to the project execution plan.

The Project Management Institute's A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK Guide) has an extensive
chapter on project quality management. The material found in this chapter would be similar to material found in a good operational
management text. Although any of the quality management techniques designed to make incremental improvement to work
processes can be applied to a project work process, the character of a project (unique and relatively short in duration) makes small
improvements less attractive on projects.

Rework on projects, as with manufacturing operations, increases the cost of the product or service and often increases the time
needed to complete the reworked activities. Because of the duration constraints of a project, the development of the appropriate
skills, materials, and work process early in the project is critical to project success. On more complex projects, time is allocated to
developing a plan to understand and develop the appropriate levels of skills and work processes.

Project management organizations that execute several similar types of projects may find the process improvement tools useful in
identifying and improving the baseline processes used on their projects. Process improvement tools may also be helpful in
identifying cost and schedule improvement opportunities. Opportunities for improvement must be found quickly to influence
project performance. The investment in time and resources to find improvements is greatest during the early stages of the project,
when the project is in the planning stages. During later project stages, as pressures to meet project schedule goals increase, the
culture of the project is less conducive to making changes in work processes.

Another opportunity for applying process improvement tools is on projects that have repetitive processes. A housing contractor that
is building several identical houses may benefit from evaluating work processes in the first few houses to explore the opportunities
available to improve the work processes. The investment of $1,000 in a work process that saves $200 per house is a good
investment as long as the contractor is building more than five houses.

Project Team: Human Resources and Communications

Staffing the project with the right skills, at the right place, and at the right time is an important responsibility of the project
management team. The project usually has two types of team members: functional managers and process managers. The functional
managers and team focus on the technology of the project. On a construction project, the functional managers would include the
engineering manager and construction superintendents. On a training project, the functional manager would include the
professional trainers; on an information technology project, the software development managers would be functional managers.
The project management team also includes project process managers. The project controls team would include process managers
who have expertise in estimating, cost tracking, planning, and scheduling. The project manager needs functional and process
expertise to plan and execute a successful project.

Because projects are temporary, the staffing plan for a project typically reflects both the long-term goals of skilled team members
needed for the project and short-term commitment that reflects the nature of the project. Exact start and end dates for team
members are often negotiated to best meet the needs of individuals and the project. The staffing plan is also determined by the
different phases of the project. Team members needed in the early or conceptual phases of the project are often not needed during
the later phases or project closeout phases. Team members needed during the execution phase are often not needed during the
conceptual or closeout phases. Each phase has staffing requirements, and the staffing of a complex project requires detailed
planning to have the right skills, at the right place, at the right time.

Typically a core project management team is dedicated to the project from start-up to closeout. This core team would include
members of the project management team: project manager, project controls, project procurement, and key members of the
function management or experts in the technology of the project. Although longer projects may experience more team turnover
than shorter projects, it is important on all projects to have team members who can provide continuity through the project phases.

For example, on a large commercial building project, the civil engineering team that designs the site work where the building will
be constructed would make their largest contribution during the early phases of the design. The civil engineering lead would bring
on different civil engineering specialties as they were needed. As the civil engineering work is completed and the structural

1.5.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24660
engineering is well under way, a large portion of the civil engineers would be released from the project. The functional managers,
the engineering manager, and civil engineering lead would provide expertise during the entire length of the project, addressing
technical questions that may arise and addressing change requests.

Project team members can be assigned to the project from a number of different sources. The organization that charters the project
can assign talented managers and staff from functional units within the organization, contract with individuals or agencies to staff
positions on the project, temporarily hire staff for the project, or use any combination of these staffing options. This staffing
approach allows the project manager to create the project organizational culture. Some project cultures are more structured and
detail oriented, and some are less structured with less formal roles and communication requirements. The type of culture the project
manager creates depends greatly on the type of project.

Communications

Completing a complex project successfully requires teamwork, and teamwork requires good communication among team members.
If those team members work in the same building, they can arrange regular meetings, simply stop by each other's office space to
get a quick answer, or even discuss a project informally at other office functions. Many complex projects in today's global
economy involve team members from widely separated locations, and the types of meetings that work within the same building are
not possible. Teams that use electronic methods of communicating without face-to-face meetings are called virtual teams.

Communicating can be divided into two categories: synchronous and asynchronous. If all the parties to the communication are
taking part in the exchange at the same time, the communication is synchronous. A telephone conference call is an example of
synchronous communication. When the participants are not interacting at the same time, the communication is asynchronous. The
letter a at the beginning of the word means not. Communications technologies require a variety of compatible devices, software,
and service providers, and communication with a global virtual team can involve many different time zones. Establishing effective
communications requires a communications plan.

Project Risk

Risk exists on all projects. The role of the project management team is to understand the kinds and levels of risks on the project and
then to develop and implement plans to mitigate these risks. Risk represents the likelihood that an event will happen during the life
of the project that will negatively affect the achievement of project goals. The type and amount of risk varies by industry type,
complexity, and phase of the project. The project risk plan will also reflect the risk profile of the project manager and key
stakeholders. People have different comfort levels with risk, and some members of the project team will be more risk adverse than
others.

The first step in developing a risk management plan involves identifying potential project risks. Some risks are easy to identify,
such as the potential for a damaging storm in the Caribbean, and some are less obvious. Many industries or companies have risk
checklists developed from past experience. The Construction Industry Institute published a one-hundred-item risk checklist
(Construction Industry Institute Cost/Schedule Task Force, 1989) that provides examples and areas of project risks. No risk
checklist will include all potential risks. The value of a checklist is the stimulation of discussion and thought about the potential
risks on a project.

The project team then analyzes the identified risks and estimates the likelihood of the risks occurring. The team then estimates the
potential impact of project goals if the event does occur. The outcome from this process is a prioritized list of estimated project
risks with a value that represents the likelihood of occurrence and the potential impact on the project.

The project team then develops a risk mitigation plan that reduces the likelihood of an event occurring or reduces the impact on the
project if the event does occur. The risk management plan is integrated into the project execution plan, and mitigation activities are
assigned to the appropriate project team member. The likelihood that all the potential events identified in the risk analysis would
occur is extremely rare. The likelihood that one or more events will happen is high.

The project risk plan reflects the risk profile of the project and balances the investment of the mitigation against the benefit for the
project. One of the more common risk mitigation approaches is the use of contingency. Contingency is funds set aside by the
project team to address unforeseen events. Projects with a high-risk profile will typically have a large contingency budget. If the
team knows which activities have the highest risk, contingency can be allocated to activities with the highest risk. When risks are

1.5.5  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24660
less identifiable to specific activities, contingency is identified in a separate line item. The plan includes periodic risk plan reviews
during the life of the project. The risk review evaluates the effectiveness of the current plan and explores for possible risks not
identified in earlier sessions.

Project Procurement

The procurement effort on projects varies widely and depends on the type of project. Often the client organization will provide
procurement services on less complex projects. In this case, the project team identifies the materials, equipment, and supplies
needed by the project and provides product specifications and a detailed delivery schedule. When the procurement department of
the parent organization provides procurement services, a liaison from the project can help the procurement team better understand
the unique requirements of the project and the time-sensitive or critical items of the project schedule.

On larger, more complex projects, personnel are dedicated to procuring and managing the equipment, supplies, and materials
needed by the project. Because of the temporary nature of projects, equipment, supplies, and materials are procured as part of the
product of the project or for the execution of the project. For example, the bricks procured for a construction project would be
procured for the product of the project, and the mortar mixer would be equipment procured for the execution of the project work.
At the end of the project, equipment bought or rented for the execution of the work of the project are sold, returned to rental
organizations, or disposed of some other way.

More complex projects will typically procure through different procurement and management methods. Commodities are common
products that are purchased based on the lowest bid. Commodities include items like concrete for building projects, office supplies,
or even lab equipment for a research project. The second type of procurement includes products that are specified for the project.
Vendors who can produce these products bid for a contract. The awarding of a contract can include price, ability to meet the project
schedule, the fit for purpose of the product, and other considerations important to the project. Manufacturing a furnace for a new
steel mill would be provided by a project vendor. Equipment especially designed and built for a research project is another
example. These vendors' performances become important parts of the project, and the project manager assigns resources to
coordinate the work and schedule of the vendor. The third procurement approach is the development of one or more partners. A
design firm that is awarded the design contract for a major part of the steel mill and a research firm that is conducting critical
subparts of the research are examples of potential project partners. A partner contributes to and is integrated into the execution plan.
Partners perform best when they share the project vision of success and are emotionally invested in the project. The project
management team builds and implements a project procurement plan that recognizes the most efficient and effective procurement
approach to support the project schedule and goals.

Key Takeaways
    During the start-up phase, the project leader develops the project infrastructure used to design and execute the project. A team is
    formed to create agreement among project stakeholders on the goals, cost, and completion date. Plans for executing the project,
    managing the schedule and quality, and controlling the budget are created.
    The scope statement establishes project parameters that define what will be done.
    The project schedule begins with a milestone schedule followed by a WBS and a project diagram. The longest path through the
    project diagram is the critical path, and the difference between the completion of the critical path and the project finish date is
    the float. Shortening the critical path is called crashing the project.
    Cost estimating begins with a conceptual or ballpark estimate that is followed by a ROM estimate. A project budget is
    determined from the cost of the tasks in the WBS. Costs are monitored during the project and estimates updated if the costs vary
    from expectations.
    Project quality begins with the specifications of materials and labor. A quality plan creates a process for assuring the
    requirements and specifications of the project are met. Quality improvement tools can be applied to projects if the company has
    several similar projects.
    Team members are selected to manage functions and processes. The staffing plan assigns people as needed. Sources of team
    members are company employees, contractors, new hires, and partners.
    The risk on a project reflects the number of things that can possibly happen that will have a negative effect on the project and
    the probability of those events happening.

1.5.6  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24660
    The provider of procurement management depends on the size of the project and the organization. Commodities are purchased
    from the lowest bidder, while specialty items are purchased from bids or from partners.

Exercises

 1. During the start-up phase, the first estimate of the cost of the project is called the __________ or ballpark estimate.
 2. Shortening the schedule to meet the project completion date is called ___________the schedule.
 3. Why would it be important to get the stakeholders in a project to actually sign the scope statement?
 4. What is the difference between a milestone schedule and a work breakdown schedule?

Areas of Knowledge

Write one or two sentences in which you describe each area of project management knowledge--as defined by the Project
Management Institute.

 1. Start-up
 2. Scope
 3. Time
 4. Cost
 5. Quality
 6. Team selection (human resources)
 7. Communications
 8. Risk
 9. Procurement

References

Construction Industry Institute Cost/Schedule Task Force, Management of Project Risks and Uncertainties (Austin, TX:
Construction Industry Institute, 1989).

Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK Guide), 4th ed. (Newtown
Square, PA: Project Management Institute, Inc., 2008), 115-16.

This page titled 1.5: Introduction to the Project Management Knowledge Areas is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored,
remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

1.5.7  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24660
1.6: Exercises

Exercises at the end of the chapter are designed to strengthen your understanding and retention of the information recently acquired
in the chapter.

Essay Questions

Write several paragraphs to provide more in-depth analysis and consideration when answering the following questions.

 1. If you were planning to change the landscaping around the location where you or a friend lives and decided to approach it like a
    project, describe the start-up activities you would use. Refer to the elements of a project start-up as described in this chapter.

 2. Describe a project you have worked on where you experienced scope creep. Begin by defining scope creep in your own words.
    Describe the project, how the scope creep occurred, and the effect it had on the project cost, quality, and completion date.

Discussion

The exercises in this section are designed to promote exchange of information among students in the classroom or in an online
discussion. The exercises are more open ended, which means that what you find might be completely different from what your
classmates find, and you can all benefit by sharing what you have learned.

 1. Client satisfaction. Should the project manager go beyond the written requirements in the project scope statement to satisfy the
    client? Does the answer to this question depend on the role of the project in the organization? For example, does it matter if the
    organization is a consulting firm that sells project management or if the project is done for another department in the same
    organization? Form an opinion on this topic, and write a few paragraphs on it to organize your thoughts on the subject. Be
    prepared to share your thoughts with classmates. Submit the work as directed by your instructor.

 2. Organizational priorities. Consider that three different organizations are planning to construct a building for their own use. The
    organizations are a for-profit company, a religious group, and a local school district. Choose three project knowledge areas, and
    consider how the project might be affected in each of these areas by the different types of organizations behind the project.
    Write a few paragraphs on this topic to organize your thoughts on the subject, and be prepared to share your thoughts with
    classmates. Submit the work as directed by your instructor.

This page titled 1.6: Exercises is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

1.6.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24661
1.7: Web Exercise

  Learning Objectives
    1. Find pronunciation of terms using an online dictionary.

Use an Online Audio Pronunciation Aid

One of the problems with learning a new vocabulary in an online class is that you do not get to hear the instructor pronounce the
terms. If the pronunciation is not obvious from the spelling, it can be embarrassing if you say the word incorrectly. Fortunately,
several online dictionaries have features that say the word. You must have speakers or headphones attached to the computer, and
they must be enabled.

How to Use an Online Audio Pronunciation Aid

 1. Obtain speakers or headphones and plug them into the audio output jack on your computer. The location of this jack on
    computers varies greatly, but it is usually green as shown in Figure 1.10 "Audio Output Ports on Two Computers".

                                                          Figure 1.10 Audio Output Ports on Two Computers
   Rob DiCarterino - White 13" Apple Macbook - CC BY 2.0; Ryan Franklin - Audio Port - CC BY 2.0.
2. Enable the speaker output. In Windows computers, look for a speaker icon in the lower right corner of the screen. If the
   speakers/headphone jack is turned off, it will have the universal symbol for "No" on it. If that is the case, double-click the icon
   and remove the check mark next to Mute to enable the speaker output. The icon displays without the "No" symbol.
3. Use your web browser to go to http://www.thefreedictionary.com.
4. In the Search box, type synchronous and then click the Search button.
5. The term is displayed with a phonetic spelling and a speaker icon, as shown in Figure 1.11 "Pronunciation Option in an Online
   Dictionary".
   Figure 1.11 Pronunciation Option in an Online Dictionary

   Source: www.thefreedictionary.com.

1.7.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24662
6. To the right of the word, click the speaker icon. You should be able to hear the pronunciation through the speakers or
   headphones.

7. Capture a screen that shows the dictionary definition of synchronous and then paste it into a word processing document.
8. Review your work and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

Element                      Best                           Adequate      Poor

File name                    N/A

Used an online audio aid to  Used a browser to open an      Same as Best  Choice of a website that does
learn to pronounce terms     online dictionary that has an                not include audio
correctly                    audio feature for pronouncing                pronunciations or has an
                             terms that is indicated by an                inability to activate the audio
                             icon                                         output

 9. Submit evidence of completion as directed by the instructor.

This page titled 1.7: Web Exercise is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                   1.7.2                                  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24662
1.8: Software and Technology Exercises

  Learning Objectives

    1. Download software from an Internet site and install it on a computer.
    2. Capture a computer screen and paste it into a word processing document.
    3. Create a folder of project management web addresses in a web browser.

Download and Install Adobe Reader

There are many programs that are useful for project managers that can be downloaded from a website. Some of them are free while
others are trial versions or are available for a license fee. To download and install software on a computer, you must have
administrative rights on that computer. If you are trying to use a computer at a company for your homework in this class, you
probably do not have administrative rights to install software. You need to use a private computer on which you can log in as the
administrator or as a user with rights to install software.

Alternatively, in some campus computer labs you are allowed to install software, but the computer is refreshed to its original
configuration when the machine is restarted. If you use a computer in a common lab, be sure to complete the assignment before the
machine is restarted.

In this exercise, you download and install Adobe Reader. This program allows you to read files that are saved in the PDF format.
This format is very popular because it allows distribution of documents that may be easily viewed but not changed.

How to Download and Install Adobe Reader

 1. Using a web browser, go to https://get.adobe.com/reader/. The Adobe home page displays as shown in Figure 1.12 "Adobe
    Reader Download Page".

                                                               Figure 1.12 Adobe Reader Download Page

   Source: Adobe product screenshot reprinted with permission from Adobe Systems Incorporated.

2. Click the check boxes next to optional features, such as virus scans or toolbars, to deselect them and then click Download now.
3. Follow the directions on the screen to install Adobe Reader.
4. When the installation process is complete, the program is added to the list of available programs on your computer. It will start

   automatically whenever you try to open a file that is saved using the PDF file format.
5. From the list of programs on your computer start Adobe Reader to confirm that it is successfully installed, as shown in Figure

   1.13 "Adobe Reader Installed".

Figure 1.13 Adobe Reader Installed  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24663
                1.8.1
   Source: Adobe product screenshot reprinted with permission from Adobe Systems Incorporated.
6. Review your work and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

Element                            Best                      Adequate                           Poor

File name                          N/A

Downloaded software from an        Program is installed and         Same as Best                Did not allow time to find a
Internet site and installed it on  functioning                                                  computer on which software
a computer                                                                                      could be installed; process
                                                                                                failed

 7. Submit evidence of completion as directed by the instructor.

Download and Install Google Earth

There are many programs that are useful for project managers that can be downloaded from a website. Some of them are free while
others are trial versions or are available for a license fee. To download and install software on a computer, you must have
administrative rights on that computer. If you are trying to use a computer at a company for your homework in this class, you
probably do not have administrative rights to install software. You need to use a private computer on which you can log in as the
administrator or as a user with rights to install software.

Alternatively, in some campus computer labs you are allowed to install software, but the computer is refreshed to its original
configuration when the machine is restarted. If you use a computer in a common lab, be sure to complete the assignment before the
machine is restarted.

In this exercise, you download and install Google Earth. This program provides information that would be valuable to a project
manager who needs to consider the implications of the location of a project.

How to Download and Install Google Earth

 1. Using a web browser, go to http://earth.google.com. The Google Earth home page displays as shown in Figure 1.14 "Google
    Earth Home Page".

 2. Click the Download Google Earth button.
 3. Scroll through and review the Terms of Service. See Figure 1.15 "Terms of Service".
 4. Click the Agree and Download button if you agree to abide by the terms. If not, contact your instructor for an alternative

    assignment.
 5. Choose a folder into which the file will be downloaded. The default choice in Windows is usually the Downloads folder in My

    Documents. Make note of where the file will be placed so you can find it in the next step.

    The file that is downloaded is a program that can be executed by clicking the file name. It is an installation program that
    manages the rest of the download and installation process. In some browsers, the option to click the file name is available from
    the browser window, and in others, you must use a file management program like Windows Explorer to find the file and then
    double-click the file name. This process is typical of most programs that you download and install.

 6. Click or double-click the file name to start the installation. A security warning box may display seeking your permission to
    install a program, as shown in Figure 1.16 "Permission to Run the Installation Program". Only programs from trusted sites
    should be installed.

 7. Click the Run button. The program will contact the Google Earth website and begin the process of downloading the main part
    of the program. A window with a progress bar displays to indicate how much of the file has been successfully transferred, as
    shown in Figure 1.17 "Progress Bar".

 8. When the installation process is complete, the program starts. Any location on earth may be entered, and a satellite image with a
    variety of accompanying information is displayed, as shown in Figure 1.18 "Google Earth Installed".

 9. Enter a location of your choice in the Fly to box and then press Enter.
10. Capture the screen and then paste it into a word processing document.
11. Review your work and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

                                                             1.8.2                              https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24663
Element                            Best                           Adequate                               Poor
                                                                  Same as Best
File name                          N/A                                                                   Did not allow time to find a
                                                                                                         computer on which software
Downloaded software from an        Program is installed and                                              could be installed; process
Internet site and installed it on  functioning                                                           failed
a computer

12. Submit evidence of completion as directed by the instructor.

Capture a Screen Using Windows XP and the Print Screen Button

The operating system of your computer manages the display on the monitor or screen. The operating system can make a copy of
the screen and save it to disk or to the clipboard--a temporary storage area--and then the image of the screen can be pasted into a
word processing document. The document can be saved and then attached to an e-mail or otherwise sent to team members. This
skill might be used to illustrate a computer problem, illustrate a point, or prove that you have followed directions properly.

How to Capture a Screen Using Windows XP and the Print Screen Button

 1. Open a blank document in your word processing program.
 2. Save the file to a folder of your choice, such as Ch01StudentName, where you use your name without spaces in place of

    StudentName. Save the file as a Word 97-2003 file type. Your display may show the .doc file extension that is characteristic of
    the file type if it is set to display file extensions. See Figure 1.19 "File Name in Save As Dialog Box".
 3. In the first line of the document, type Chapter 1 Exercises by StudentName where you replace StudentName with your name.
    Press the Enter key to move the insertion point to the next line, as shown in Figure 1.20 "Document with Insertion Point on
    Second Line".
 4. Leave this document open. Start a web browser. Use the browser to go to http://maps.google.com. The Google Maps page
    displays.
 5. On the keyboard, find the PrntScrn button. This is the Print Screen button. (Some laptop computers do not have a PrntScrn
    button. If you have a laptop with Windows XP and no PrntScrn button, use a search engine like Google to find a free screen
    capture software like ScreenHunter, and then install it.)
 6. Press the PrntScrn button. An image of the screen is saved in a temporary memory area called the Windows clipboard.
 7. Switch to the word processing document. Click below the first line of text. Hold the Control (CTRL) key and then press the V
    key to paste the image from the clipboard.
 8. Press the Enter key twice to create a new empty line below the image. See Figure 1.21 "Capture of the Google Maps Screen
    with Insertion Point below the Image".
 9. Review your work and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

Element                            Best                           Adequate                               Poor

File name                          Ch01StudentName in the               Same as Best                     Different file name than
                                   Word 2003 format where                                                specified without the student's
                                   StudentName is replaced by                                            name
                                   your name

Download software from an          Title; screen capture of the         Title plus screen capture;       Missing title
Internet site and install it on a  Google Maps site; insertion          insertion point on same line as
computer                           point below the image                image

10. Save the file and submit it as directed by the instructor.

Capture a Screen Using Windows Vista or Windows 7

The operating system of your computer manages the display on the monitor or screen. The operating system can make a copy of
the screen and save it to disk or to the clipboard--a temporary storage area--and then the image of the screen can be pasted into a

                                                                 1.8.3                                   https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24663
word processing document. The document can be saved and then attached to an e-mail or otherwise sent to team members. This
skill might be used to illustrate a computer problem, illustrate a point, or prove that you have followed directions properly.

How to Capture a Screen Using Vista or Windows 7 and the Snipping Tool

 1. Open a blank document in your word processing program.
 2. Save the file to a folder of your choice, such as Ch01StudentName where you use your name in place of StudentName. Save the

    file as a Word 97-2003 file type. Your display may show the .doc file extension that is characteristic of the file type if it is set to
    display file extensions. See Figure 1.19 "File Name in Save As Dialog Box".
 3. In the first line of the document, type Chapter 1 Exercises by StudentName where you replace StudentName with your name.
    Press the Enter key to move the insertion point to the next line, as shown in Figure 1.20 "Document with Insertion Point on
    Second Line".
 4. Leave this document open. Start a web browser. Use the browser to go to http://maps.google.com. The Google Maps page
    displays.
 5. Click the Windows Start button to display a menu of options.
 6. On the menu of options, click All Programs.
 7. On the menu of programs, click the Accessories folder.
 8. On the menu of accessories, click Snipping Tool.
 9. In the Snipping Tool, click the New Snip button arrow and then click Window Snip.
10. Click anywhere on the screen. In the Snipping Tool dialog box, on the toolbar, click the Copy button.
11. Switch to the word processing document. Click below the first line of text. Hold the CTRL key, and then press the V key to
    paste the image from the clipboard.
12. Press the Enter key twice to create a new empty line below the image. See Figure 1.21 "Capture of the Google Maps Screen
    with Insertion Point below the Image".
13. Review your work and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

Element                          Best                          Adequate                                Poor

File name                        Ch01StudentName in the               Same as Best                     Different file name than
                                 Word 2003 format where                                                specified without the student's
                                 StudentName is replaced by                                            name
                                 your name

Capture a computer screen and    Title; screen capture of the         Title plus screen capture;       Missing title
paste it into a word processing  Google Maps site; insertion          insertion point on same line as
document                         point below the image                image

14. Save the file and submit it as directed by the instructor.

Capture a Screen Using OSX on a Mac

The operating system of your computer manages the display on the monitor or screen. The operating system can make a copy of
the screen and save it to disk or to the clipboard--a temporary storage area--and then the image of the screen can be pasted into a
word processing document. The document can be saved and then attached to an e-mail or otherwise sent to team members. This
skill might be used to illustrate a computer problem, illustrate a point, or prove that you have followed directions properly.

How to Capture a Screen Using OSX on a Mac

 1. Open a blank document in your word processing program.
 2. Save the file to a folder of your choice, such as Ch01StudentName where you use your name in place of StudentName. Save the

    file as a Word 97-2003 file type. Your display may show the .doc file extension that is characteristic of the file type if it is set to
    display file extensions. See Figure 1.19 "File Name in Save As Dialog Box".
 3. In the first line of the document, type Chapter 1 Exercises by StudentName where you replace StudentName with your name.
    Press the Enter key to move the insertion point to the next line, as shown in Figure 1.20 "Document with Insertion Point on
    Second Line".

                                                               1.8.4                                   https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24663
4. On the keyboard, press Command + Control + Shift + 3. An image of the screen is saved in the clipboard.
5. Switch to the word processing document. Click below the first line of text. Hold the CTRL key, and then press the V key to

   paste the image from the clipboard.
6. Press the Enter key twice to create a new empty line below the image. See Figure 1.21 "Capture of the Google Maps Screen

   with Insertion Point below the Image".
7. Review your work and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

Element                          Best                          Adequate                                Poor

File name                        Ch01StudentName in the               Same as Best                     Different file name than
                                 Word 2003 format where                                                specified without the student's
                                 StudentName is replaced by                                            name
                                 your name

Capture a computer screen and    Title; screen capture of the         Title plus screen capture;       Missing title
paste it into a word processing  Google Maps site; insertion          insertion point on same line as
document                         point below the image                image

 8. Save the file and submit it as directed by the instructor.

Create a Folder of Bookmarks in a Web Browser in Chrome

You will visit sites that contain supporting information and useful templates. To save the addresses of these sites, you can create in
a folder named Project Management in your web browser.

How to Create a Folder of Bookmarks in Google Chrome

 1. Open your web browser program. In the address box, type http://maps.google.com and then press Enter. The Google Maps
    home page displays as shown in Figure 1.22 "Google Maps Home Page".

 2. On the toolbar, click the Bookmarks button. The Bookmark Added dialog box displays.[1]The default location for the bookmark
    is the Bookmarks bar, which is a toolbar that contains links to the websites. It is also a folder.

 3. In the Bookmark dialog box, click the Close button. The web address for http://maps.google.com is placed in the Bookmarks
    bar folder and is available for display on the toolbar.

 4. On your keyboard, at the lower left, locate the Control (CTRL) key. Press and hold the CTRL key, and then on the keyboard
    press B.[2] The Bookmark toolbar displays, as shown in Figure 1.23 "Chrome Bookmarks Bar".

 5. On the toolbar above the Bookmarks bar, click the Tools button. On the menu, click Bookmark Manager. The Bookmark
    Manager dialog box displays, as shown in Figure 1.24 "Chrome Bookmark Manager Dialog Box".

 6. In the Bookmark Manager dialog box, on the toolbar, on the Organize button, click the small arrow.[3]
    In the menu, click New Folder. The New Folder dialog box displays.

 7. In the New Folder dialog box, in the Name box, type Project Management and then click OK. The Project Management folder
    is added to the Bookmarks bar as shown in Figure 1.25 "Folder Added to the Bookmarks Bar".

 8. On the toolbar, click the Tools button. On the menu, click Bookmark manager. The Bookmark manager dialog box displays, as
    shown in Figure 1.26 "Managing Bookmarks".

 9. Move the mouse pointer onto Google Maps. Press and hold the left mouse button and move the mouse to move the pointer on
    the screen to the Project Management folder in either pane of the dialog box.[4]
    The link is moved into the Project Management folder.

10. In the Bookmark Manager dialog box, in the left pane, click the Project Management folder. The link to Google Maps is
    displayed in the right pane to indicate that it is now in the Project Management folder. The link to Google Maps displays in the
    pane to the right, as shown in Figure 1.27 "Link Placed in the Project Management Folder".

11. Use the skills you practiced previously to capture an image of this dialog box and then paste it into Ch01StudentName.doc.
12. In the Bookmark Manager dialog box, in the upper right corner, click the close button.[5]

    Close the Chrome web browser.
13. Start the Chrome browser again. On the Bookmarks bar, click the Project Management folder. The link to Google Maps is

    displays under the Project Management folder on the Bookmarks bar, as shown in Figure 1.28 "Project Management Folder on

                                                               1.8.5                                   https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24663
    the Chrome Bookmarks Bar".
14. Click the link to Google Maps. The Google Maps home page displays. Close the browser.
15. Review your work and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

Element                      Best                         Adequate                         Poor

File name                    Ch01StudentName.doc          Same name using .docx format     Does not include student name
                                                                                           in file name
Create a folder of project   Folder named Project         Same as Best
management web addresses in  Management on the                                             Project Management folder
a web browser                                                                              without a working link to
                             Bookmarks toolbar with a                                      Google Maps or just a link to
                             working link to Google Maps                                   Google Maps as one of the
                                                                                           Favorites but not in a folder

16. Submit evidence of completion as directed by the instructor.

Create a Folder of Bookmarks in a Web Browser in Firefox 3

You will visit sites that contain supporting information and useful templates. To save the addresses of these sites, you can create a
folder named Project Management in your web browser.

How to Create a Folder of Bookmarks in Mozilla Firefox 3

 1. Open your web browser program. In the address box, type http://maps.google.com and then press Enter. The Google Maps
    home page displays as shown in Figure 1.29 "Firefox 3 Browser".

 2. On the toolbar, click the Bookmarks button. The Edit This Bookmark dialog box displays[6]
    as shown in Figure 1.30 "Bookmark Dialog Box in Firefox". The default location for the bookmark is the Unsorted Bookmarks.

 3. In the Edit This Bookmark dialog box, click the Done button. The web address for http://maps.google.com is placed in the list
    of unsorted bookmarks, and the Bookmarks toolbar displays, as shown in Figure 1.31 "Firefox Bookmarks Bar".

 4. On the Menu bar, click Bookmarks. On the menu, click Organize Bookmarks. The Library dialog box displays, as shown in
    Figure 1.32 "Library of Bookmarks in Firefox".

 5. In the Library dialog box, in the left pane, click Bookmarks Toolbar. On the Library dialog box, on the toolbar, click Organize.
    On the menu, click New Folder. The Add Folder dialog box displays.

 6. In the Add Folder dialog box, in the Name box, type Project Management as shown in Figure 1.33 "Folder Added to the
    Bookmarks Bar".

 7. In the Add Folder dialog box, click the Add button. The new folder is added to the Bookmarks toolbar.
 8. In the Library dialog box, in the left pane, click the arrow to the left of Bookmarks Toolbar to show its subfolders. The Project

    Management folder displays as a subfolder.
 9. In the Library dialog box, in the left pane, click Unsorted Bookmarks to show its bookmarks. Locate the link to Google Maps,

    as shown in Figure 1.34 "Managing Bookmarks".
10. Move the mouse pointer onto Google Maps. Press and hold the left mouse button and move the mouse to move the pointer on

    the screen to the Project Management folder in the left pane of the dialog box.[7]
    The link is moved into the Project Management folder.
11. In the Library dialog box, in the left pane, click the Project Management folder. The link to Google Maps is displayed in the
    right pane to indicate that it is now in the Project Management folder, as shown in Figure 1.35 "Link Placed in the Project
    Management Folder".
12. In the Library dialog box, in the upper right corner, click the Close button.[8]
    Close the Firefox web browser.
13. Start the Firefox browser again. On the Bookmarks bar, click the Project Management folder. The link to Google Maps displays
    under the Project Management folder on the Bookmarks bar, as shown in Figure 1.36 "Project Management Folder on the
    Bookmarks Bar".
14. Capture this screen and paste it into a blank word processing document. Save the document as Ch01StudentName.doc

                                                  1.8.6                                    https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24663
15. In the browser, click the link in the Project Management folder to Google Maps. The Google Maps home page displays. Close
    the browser.

16. Review your work and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

Element                      Best                         Adequate      Poor

File name                    N/A

Create a folder of project   Folder named Project         Same as Best  Project Management folder
management web addresses in  Management on the                          without a working link to
a web browser                Bookmarks toolbar with a                   Google Maps or just a link to
                                                                        Google Maps as one of the
                             working link to Google Maps                Favorites but not in a folder

17. Submit evidence of completion as directed by the instructor.

Create a Folder of Bookmarks in a Web Browser in Internet Explorer 8

You will visit sites that contain supporting information and useful templates. To save the addresses of these sites, you can create a
folder named Project Management in your web browser.

How to Create a Folder of Favorites in Internet Explorer 8

 1. Open your web browser program. In the address box, type http://maps.google.com and then press Enter. The Google Maps
    home page displays as shown in Figure 1.37 "Google Maps Home Page".

 2. On the toolbar, click the Favorites button. The Add to Favorites menu displays as shown in Figure 1.38 "Add to Favorites
    Menu".

 3. To the right of Add to Favorites, click the arrow.[9]
    On the menu, click Add to Favorites bar. Click outside the menu to close it. The web address for maps.google.com is placed in
    the Favorites toolbar and the toolbar is displayed, as shown in Figure 1.39 "Internet Explorer Favorites Toolbar".

 4. On the Favorites toolbar, click the Favorites button. On the menu, click the Add to Favorites arrow. On the menu, click
    Organize Favorites. The Organize Favorites dialog box displays, as shown in Figure 1.40 "Internet Explorer Favorites Dialog
    Box". Your favorites and folders will be different from those shown.

 5. In the Organize Favorites dialog box, click the New Folder button. A new folder is added with the default name--New Folder--
    selected and ready to be replaced.

 6. Type Project Management and then press Enter. The Project Management folder is added at the bottom of the list of favorite
    links and folders, as shown in Figure 1.41 "Folder Added to the List of Favorites".

 7. Locate the Favorites Bar folder on the list of favorites. Drag the Project Management folder onto the Favorites Bar folder and
    release the mouse button. The Project Management folder is a subfolder of the Favorites Bar, as shown in Figure 1.42 "Project
    Management Folder Moved into the Favorites Bar Folder".

 8. In the Organize Favorites dialog box, drag the Google Maps link onto the Project Management folder. The link to Google Maps
    is placed in the Project Management folder.

 9. Click the Project Management folder. The Google Maps link displays in the Project Management folder, as shown in Figure
    1.43 "Google Maps Link in the Project Management Subfolder".

10. In the Bookmark Manager dialog box, click the Close button. Close the web browser.
11. Start the Internet Explorer browser again. On the Favorites toolbar, click the Project Management folder. The link to Google

    Maps displays under the Project Management folder on the Bookmarks bar, as shown in Figure 1.44 "Project Management
    Folder on the Internet Explorer Bookmarks Bar".
12. Capture this screen and paste it into Ch01StudentName.doc.
13. In the browser, click the link to Google Maps. The Google Maps home page displays. Close the browser.
14. Review your work and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

                                   1.8.7                                https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24663
Element                      Best                                 Adequate      Poor
File name                    Ch01StudentName.doc                  .docx format
                                                                                Student name not in file name
Create a folder of project   Folder named Project                 Same as Best
management web addresses in  Management on the Favorites                        Project Management folder
a web browser                toolbar with a working link to                     without a working link to
                             Google Maps                                        Google Maps or just a link to
                                                                                Google Maps as one of the
                                                                                Favorites but not in a folder

15. Submit evidence of completion as directed by the instructor.

Create a Folder of Bookmarks in a Web Browser in Internet Explorer 9

You will visit sites that contain supporting information and useful templates. To save the addresses of these sites, you can create a
folder named Project Management in your web browser.

How to Create a Folder of Favorites in Internet Explorer 9

 1. Open your web browser program. In the address box, type http://maps.google.com and then press Enter. The Google Maps
    home page displays as shown in Figure 1.45 "Google Maps Home Page".

 2. On the toolbar, click the View Favorites button, and then click the Add to Favorites button. The Add a Favorite dialog box
    displays as shown in Figure 1.46 "Add a Favorite Dialog Box".

 3. Click the New Folder button. In the Create a Folder dialog box, in the Folder Name box, type Project Management. Confirm
    that Favorites is chosen in the Create in box, as shown in Figure 1.47 "Create a New Folder".

 4. Click the Create button.
 5. In the Add a Favorite dialog box, observe that the new folder displays in the Create in box, as shown in Figure 1.48 "Internet

    Explorer Add a Favorite Dialog Box".
 6. Click the Add button.
 7. Click the View Favorites button. Click the Favorites tab, if necessary. Scroll to the new Project Management folder and then

    click it. The link to Google Maps is stored within the Project Management folder, as shown in Figure 1.49 "Google Maps Link
    in the Project Management Folder".
 8. In the Bookmark Manager dialog box, click the Close button. Close the web browser.
 9. Capture this screen and paste it into Ch01StudentName.doc.
10. In the browser, click the link to Google Maps. The Google Maps home page displays. Close the browser.
11. Review your work and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

Element                      Best                                 Adequate      Poor

File name                    Ch01StudentName.doc                  .docx format  StudentName not in file name

Create a folder of project   Folder named Project                 Same as Best  Project Management folder
management web addresses in  Management on the Favorites                        without a working link to
a web browser                toolbar with a working link to                     Google Maps or just a link to
                             Google Maps                                        Google Maps as one of the
                                                                                Favorites but not in a folder

12. Submit evidence of completion as directed by the instructor.

Create a Folder of Bookmarks in a Web Browser in Safari

You will visit sites that contain supporting information and useful templates. To save the addresses of these sites, you can create a
folder named Project Management in your web browser.

How to Create a Folder of Bookmarks in Apple Safari

 1. Open your web browser program. In the address box, type http://maps.google.com and then press Enter. The Google Maps
    home page displays as shown in Figure 1.50 "Safari Browser".

                                                  1.8.8                         https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24663
 2. On the toolbar, click the Bookmarks button. A dialog box displays[10]as shown in Figure 1.51 "Dialog Box in Safari". The
    default location for the bookmark is the Bookmarks bar.

 3. In the dialog box, click the Add button. The web address for http://maps.google.com is placed on the Bookmarks toolbar, as
    shown in Figure 1.52 "Safari Bookmarks Bar".

 4. On the Menu bar, click Bookmarks. On the menu, click Add Bookmarks Folder. The Bookmarks dialog box displays, as shown
    in Figure 1.53 "New Folder".

 5. In the Bookmarks dialog box, with untitled folder selected, type Project Management as shown in Figure 1.54 "Folder Added to
    the Bookmarks Bar".

 6. In the Bookmarks dialog box, in the Collections pane, click Bookmarks Bar to display its contents. The Google Maps link
    displays in the right pane.

 7. Move the mouse pointer onto Google Maps. Drag the Google Maps link onto the Project Management folder. The link is moved
    into the Project Management folder.

 8. In the Bookmarks dialog box, in the left pane, click the Project Management folder. The link to Google Maps is displayed in the
    right pane to indicate that it is now in the Project Management folder, as shown in Figure 1.55 "Link Placed in Project
    Management Folder".

 9. Use the skills you practiced previously to capture an image of this dialog box. If necessary, open Ch01StudentName.doc. Paste
    the screen capture below the previous screen. Save the file and leave it open.

10. From the Collections pane, drag the Project Management folder onto the Bookmarks toolbar. The Project Management folder is
    added to the Bookmarks toolbar, as shown in Figure 1.56 "Project Management Folder on Bookmarks Toolbar".

11. In the Bookmarks dialog box, in the upper left corner, click the close button.[11]
    Close the Safari web browser.

12. Start the Safari browser again. On the Bookmarks bar, click the Project Management folder. The link to Google Maps displays
    under the Project Management folder on the Bookmarks bar, as shown in Figure 1.57 "Project Management Folder on
    Bookmarks Toolbar".

13. Capture this screen and paste it into a blank word processing document. Save the document as Ch01StudentName.doc.
14. In the browser, click the link to Google Maps. The Google Maps home page displays. Close the browser.
15. Review your work and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

Element                      Best                         Adequate      Poor

File name                    Ch01StudentName.doc          Same as Best  Other word processing
                                                                        program format

Create a folder of project   Folder named Project         Same as Best  Project Management folder
management web addresses in  Management on the                          without a working link to
a web browser                Bookmarks toolbar with a                   Google Maps or just a link to
                             working link to Google Maps                Google Maps as one of the
                                                                        Favorites but not in a folder

16. Submit evidence of completion as directed by the instructor.

 1. This assumes that you have not previously added this site as a bookmark. 
 2. In the future, this sequence of holding the Control key and pressing another key will be written with a plus sign (e.g., Ctrl + B).

    
 3. This is an example of Microsoft syntax. In the future, the process of clicking the arrow on a button will be shortened (e.g., click

    the Organize arrow). 
 4. In the future, description of this type of process will be shortened (e.g., drag Google Maps to the Project Management folder).

    
 5. In the future, description of this process will be shortened (e.g., close the dialog box). 
 6. This assumes that you have not previously added this site as a bookmark. 
 7. In the future, description of this type of process will be shortened (e.g., drag Google Maps to the Project Management folder).

    

                                                  1.8.9                 https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24663
 8. In the future, description of this process will be shortened (e.g., close the dialog box). 
 9. In the future, arrows associated with buttons will be referred to with the button name (e.g., click the Add to Favorites button). 
10. This assumes that you have not previously added this site as a bookmark. 
11. In the future, description of this process will be shortened (e.g., close the dialog box). 

This page titled 1.8: Software and Technology Exercises is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

1.8.10  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24663
CHAPTER OVERVIEW

2: Project Profiling

  2.1: Using a Project Profile
  2.2: Project Profiling Models
  2.3: Complex Systems and the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index
  2.4: Darnall-Preston Complexity Index Structure
  2.5: Exercises
  2.6: Software and Technology Exercise
This page titled 2: Project Profiling is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                                                                              1
2.1: Using a Project Profile

  Learning Objectives

    1. Identify project attributes that can be used for project profiling.
    2. Define project profiling.

A few years ago, I observed a project manager with a long list of successful projects absolutely struggle with a project. As I looked
around, I noticed that often times project managers who do superb jobs on some projects will fail on others. What causes this to
happen? Why were project managers successful on some projects but struggling on others?

Even though all projects are by definition unique, there are attributes that are common among projects that allow the
characterization or profiling of a project. We can look at just two project attributes and develop some understanding of the project.
A large project that will be executed in at least three locations will have a very different profile from a small project that will be
executed in one location. These two attributes--size and location--provide information about the project that will enable a
manager in the parent organization to assign a project manager with the appropriate knowledge and skills. We can then develop an
execution approach to increase the likelihood of success.

Project managers have not always been assigned to projects based on their skills and the skills required by the project. Research by
the Construction Industry Institute (Construction Industry Institute, 2009) indicated that the number one criterion for assignment of
a project manager to a project was availability. Even if available, the ideal project manager for a large construction project may not
be a good fit for a software development project. The technical knowledge needed to manage these projects is not the same and
having the wrong technical knowledge may make the difference between a successful project and project failure.

Even within the same industry, like the construction industry, different skills are needed by the project manager for different
projects. For example, the construction of an office building in downtown Philadelphia is a very different project from the
construction of a chemical plant in Mexico. The differences in these projects require different skills and different execution
approaches. Organizations have not had good tools for understanding and matching the needs of a project with the project manager
who has the right skills and experience. Developing a project profile is one method for developing an understanding of the project
that will allow a systematic approach to developing an execution plan based on the profile of the project and selecting a project
manager who has the right kind of experience and skills.

Project profiling is the process of extracting a characterization from the known attributes of a project. The characterization will
provide a more comprehensive understanding of the project that should result in developing an appropriate execution approach and
the assignment of organizational resources. In different terms, project profiling is a process that summarizes what is known about
the attributes of a project and places the project into a category with other projects that have similar characteristics. For example,
you can characterize a project as a large project or a small project. The size of the project becomes the profiling attribute. You can
characterize a project as domestic or global, and the location of the project becomes the profiling characteristic.

A company that has twenty projects may determine that four of these projects are estimated to cost more than $1 million dollars and
the remaining sixteen projects are estimated to cost much less. The company then communicates that all projects over $1 million be
considered a large project. The company now establishes a rule that large projects will require a project manager with at least five
years experience, it will have a vice president as executive sponsor, and it will require formal quarterly reports. In this example, one
characteristic is used to develop the organization's project management approach to their twenty projects.

Key Takeaways
    Project profiles can be created based on attributes such as budget and size to determine a systematic approach to developing an
    execution plan and selecting a project manager.
    Project profiling is the process of extracting a characterization from the known attributes of a project.

Exercises

 1. Several types of project profiles use budget size, location, and __________ knowledge.
 2. Project profiling is the process of extracting a characterization from the known _____________ of a project.

2.1.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24664
 3. Describe how location can make a difference in the difficulty of a project.
 4. Why is it valuable to create a project profile? Base your answer on the text of this chapter but use your own words.

Project Profiling

    Propose another attribute that might be used for project profiling besides budget size, location, and technical knowledge.
    Include the following in your answer:

        Describe the categories into which you would divide your attribute.
        Describe the skills or knowledge a project manager would need to work on a project in each of your categories.

References

Construction Industry Institute, "Executive Summary," RR103-11--Optimizing Project Organizations, 2009, www.construction-
institute.org/scriptcontent/more/rr103_11_more.cfm (accessed June 18, 2009).

This page titled 2.1: Using a Project Profile is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

2.1.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24664
2.2: Project Profiling Models

  Learning Objectives

    1. Identify different methods of typing projects.

Aaron J. Shenhar and Dov Dvir (Shenhar & Dvir, 1996) developed a typology--classification or profile--of engineering projects
that reflected two dimensions. The first dimension reflected the technological uncertainty and ranged from low tech, medium tech,
and high tech to super high tech. Although projects involve the use of various levels of technology, Shenhar and Dvir develop
criteria for each type of technological uncertainty that enabled the project to be typed. The second dimension reflected the system
scope. The system scope dimension ranged from assembly projects that dealt with building a single component, to system projects
that included interactive elements, to array projects that included a wide dispersal of interactive systems and subsystems.

Shenhar and Dvir observed that the project execution approach was connected to the project type. The study identified different
management patterns associated with project type as well as different management tools and practices. As the project system scope
became more complex and the system scope of the project became larger, more sophisticated management tools were put in place
to reduce project uncertainty. As project technology increased, project managers became more invested in processes to manage
technical issues such as redesign and testing. As projects increased in system scope, project managers became more invested in
formal planning and control issues. In later research, Shenhar (Shenhar, 1999) developed recommendations for adjusting the project
management approach based on the project typology--systematic classification or profile. For example, project managers will use
more risk management techniques (see Chapter 11 "Managing Project Risk" on risk management) when the technological
uncertainty is high.

Robert Youker (Youker, 1998) identified basic differences in project types. Among the attributes he used were the uncertainty and
risk, level of sophistication of the workers, the level of detail in the planning, the newness of the technology, and the time pressure.
Youker also looked at project size, duration, industrial sector, geographic location, number of workers, cost, complexity, urgency,
and organizational design as attributes that help determine a project profile.

Key Takeaways
    The typology of Shenhar and Dvir characterized projects based on the attributes of technological uncertainty and complexity of
    scope.
    Youker used the attributes of uncertainty and risk, sophistication of workers, planning detail, industrial sector, location, number
    of workers, cost, complexity, urgency, and organizational design.

Exercises

 1. The typology of Shenhar and Dvir used attributes of technological ____________ and project scope.
 2. The typology of Youker used several attributes, including the ________ of workers.
 3. What are the two attributes of a project that Shenhar and Dvir used to characterize projects?

Simple versus Complex Profiles

    Simple profiles are easier to use than profiles that consider many attributes. Compare the profiling method of Shenhar and Dvir
    with the profiling method of Youker. Address the following issues:

        Which profiling method would be faster and easier to communicate to team members? (Explain your choice.)
        Which attributes used by Youker but not used by Shenhar and Dvir do you think are important? Explain your answer and
        give an example of a situation where consideration of the attribute would make a difference to the project.

References

Shenhar, A. J., Adapting Your Project Management Style: The Key to Project Success (Hoboken, NJ: Stevens Institute of
Technology, 1999).

Shenhar, A. J. and Dov Dvir, "Toward a Typological Theory of Project Management," Research Policy 25 (1996): 607-32.

2.2.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24665
Youker, R., "Defining the Hierarchy of Project Objectives," IPMA Conference (Slovenia: American Society for Advancement of
Project Management, 1998).

This page titled 2.2: Project Profiling Models is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

2.2.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24665
2.3: Complex Systems and the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index

  Learning Objectives

    1. Describe the characteristics of complex systems.
    2. Identify the categories used by the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index.

Understanding and managing complex systems like a project require some systems concepts that have been developed in other
disciplines and applied to project management as a tool to make complex projects manageable.

Complex Systems

When is a project complex? The answer to this question depends on how you define complex. One way to explore this question is
to look at complexity models in various disciplines for insights that may apply to project management. In biology, the simplest
plant is composed of one cell. As the cellular structure increases in number of cells and the number of connections to other cells
increases, the plant life is seen as more complex. In the animal kingdom, the single cell ameba is the simplest animal, and life
becomes more complex as the numbers of cells combine to form muscles and organs.

The complexity of a system is usually determined by the number of parts or activities, the degree of differentiation between the
parts, and the structure of their connections. Heterogeneous and irregularly configured systems are complex, such as organisms,
airplanes, and junkyards. Order is the opposite of complex. Ordered systems are homogenous and redundant, like an interstate toll
booth or a production line in a factory. Complex systems have multiple interacting components whose collective behavior cannot
be simply inferred from the behavior of the components (Gould, 1996).

In addition to the number of parts, the degree of differentiation between parts and the number, type, and strength of relationships
between parts also influences the degree of complexity. For example, the transistors in a computer have three connections to other
parts of the computer, but each nerve cell in the human brain can be connected to thousands of other cells in the brain, which is
why the human brain is more complex than a computer. Complexity is context dependent. A project is more or less complex in
relation to the number of activities, the type and strength of relationships to other project activities, and the degree and type of
relationships to the project environment.

Projects are complex adaptive systems. A complex adaptive system is a system consisting of a large number of parts or activities
that interact with each other in numerous and various ways. A complex adaptive system is adaptive if the activities adjust or react to
the events of the environment. Successful adaptive systems adjust in a way that facilitates or allows the system or project to achieve
its purpose.

The dependence of the project on the activities, the interdependence of the activities, and the specialization of the activities
underscore the relationship dependence of project activities. This relationship dependence is a key aspect of complex adaptive
systems. The nature of complex adaptive systems can be probed by investigating the impact of change in one activity and the effect
on other activities and the behavior of the whole. Activities must be studied and understood as interrelated, connected parts of the
whole. If you remove a computer chip from a computer and the computer powers down, do not assume the purpose of the chip was
to provide power to the computer. If you remove or shorten a project kickoff activity, do not assume the project will finish earlier
because of the dependence of later project activities on project kickoff activities. Any change to the kickoff activities will impact
other activities and the project as a whole.

  Chemical Company

  A chemical company was building a new plant in Tennessee with a new design model that was intended to shorten the design
  phase on the project and lower the cost. The design of the plant was managed by a United States-based company with part of
  the design work contracted to an Indian company. The engineers in the United States would work on the design and would
  electronically transfer the design work to India at the end of the day. Engineers in India, many who had graduated from U.S.
  colleges, continued to work on the design and at the end of the day would electronically transfer the work back to the United
  States. The project would benefit from differences in time zones that would allow work on the project twenty-four hours per
  day. The project would also benefit from the lower engineering wages in India. The project approach was abandoned when the

2.3.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24666
  project started falling behind schedule. The added complexity of the project offset the scheduling and cost benefit. The project
  complexity profile became significantly less complex when the execution approach changed from global to domestic
  partnering. The execution model could have worked but would have required more investment during the start-up phase of the
  project.

Complex adaptive systems have three characteristics that are also reflected in complex projects.

Complex Adaptive Systems Tend to Self-Organize

Formal organizational charts indicate reporting relationships but are not very effective at displaying project relationships. Projects
organize around the work, phases, or activities. The organization of the project reacts to the nature of the work at any given phase.

During the start-up meeting of a large complex project, the project manager facilitated the development of the project organization
chart that included all the major companies and leaders from the client and key subcontractors. After the chart was complete, the
project manager ripped the chart up in front of the entire project team to demonstrate his key message, which was that there are
formal reporting relationships, but the real leadership and communication will change during the life of the project. In other words,
the system will adapt to meet the needs of the project at each phase. During the design phase, the engineering team will identify the
primary needs and communication will center on supporting the engineering efforts. Later, the procurement team will take the lead
as critical equipment and supplies are identified and purchased. Later in the project, the construction team takes the lead as the
project moves from the design offices to the field and the engineering and procurement teams support the construction effort.

Informally, the project team reorganizes information flows and priorities to support the current work of the project and a good
project manager facilitates this adaptive behavior of the project organization by minimizing the impact of formal authority and
processes.

Complex Systems Adapt to Changing Environments

A deterministic system is a system that will produce the same results if you start with the same conditions. The outcome can be
reliably predicted if you know the starting conditions. For example, if you fire a rifle several times at a target, the hits on the target
will be closely grouped if all the initial conditions are almost identical. A nonlinear, or chaotic, system can produce wildly different
results even if the starting conditions are almost exactly the same. If today's weather pattern is almost exactly the same as it was on
a previous date, the weather a week later could be entirely different. Projects are usually nonlinear systems. If we execute an
identical complex project three different times, we would deliver three different outcomes. We start with the assumption that the
project is deterministic and use scenarios and simulations to develop the most likely outcome, yet a small change such as the timing
of someone's vacation or a small change in the delivery date of equipment can change the entire trajectory of a project.

  Drug Manufacturing Facility

  A pharmaceutical company in California developed a drug that improved the quality of life for people with arthritis and in
  some cases prevented serious debilitations and even death. The drug was in the final FDA testing stage, and the company
  decided to accept the risk and proceed with designing and building a facility to manufacture the drug. The company had done
  this type of project before, and some managers felt that the outcome would be fairly predictable. The company assigned the
  lead scientist as the project manager to get the project started. Two weeks into the project start-up, the company president
  realized the project needed a project manager with more engineering and construction expertise and hired a new person to
  manage the project. Then the company decided to build the facility on land the company owned in Colorado, and the project
  team began designing a facility that would fit the existing site. Thirty days into the design phase, the company found an
  existing facility that could be retrofitted to meet the production needs of the new drug. During the first week of construction,
  the drug failed an FDA test and the project was placed on hold. This project environment was highly volatile, and the project
  plan and organization adjusted and evolved to respond to each of these changes.

Not all projects experience this degree of environmental turbulence, yet all projects experience some forms of environment shift
during the life of the project. This is one of the reasons project managers develop an aggressive change management process. The
purpose of the change management process is not to stop change but to incorporate the change into the project planning and

2.3.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24666
execution processes. Projects, like all other complex adaptive systems, must respond to the evolving environment to succeed. Plan
as if the project is deterministic but be prepared for unpredictable changes.

In addition to responding to changes in the project environment, the internal project organization and environment is in a constant
state of change. New people become members of the team, people quit, retire, and get sick. The office roof starts leaking,
headquarters rolls out a new computer program required for all workers, or the project's lead engineer cannot get her immigration
visa extended. These are real examples of events that occurred on one project, and the project team adjusted to each event. The
adaptation to changes in the project's internal situation while also adapting to the external environment reflects the coevolving
nature of a complex adaptive system. An increase in the number of events within the project and the project environment that are
likely to change during the life of the project is reflected in an increase in the complexity of a project.

Darnall-Preston Complexity Index

Profiling a project correctly requires a system that is relatively easy to use but that includes enough attributes to capture all the most
important characteristics of a complex project. The Darnall-Preston Complexity Index (DPCITM) achieves this objective by
grouping eleven attributes into four broad categories: internal attributes, external attributes, technological complexity, and
environmental attributes.

Projects are more likely to fail in the beginning, not in the end. This generalized statement reflects the importance of understanding
the environment in which a project will be executed and the importance of developing an execution plan that can be successfully
implemented within this environment. Recovery costs can be extremely high for projects where the environment is misread or the
execution plan does not address critical issues of the project environment. In addition to cost overruns and delays in the project,
execution plans that are not aligned with the project environment can create barriers that make recovery difficult, and in some
cases, the business purpose of the project cannot be met. The DPCI is a tool to assist project stakeholders in developing a
comprehensive analysis of the project environment and a project execution plan more aligned with that environment.
Understanding and aligning a project with the project's environment increase the likelihood of achieving project success.

The foundation of a sound project execution plan is an assessment of the project environment. This assessment provides the
information on which the execution plan is built. In the absence of an accurate assessment of the project environment, the project
leadership makes assumptions and develops the execution plan around those assumptions. The quantity and quality of those
assumptions will significantly influence the effectiveness of the project execution plan. The amount of information available to the
project manager will increase over time and assumptions will be replaced with better information and better estimates. As better
tools are developed for evaluating the project environment, better information will become available to the project manager.

The project environment includes all the conditions that can influence the outcome or success of the project. Project size,
technological complexity, cultural and language barriers, the political landscape, and resource constraints are some of the
components of the project environment that can influence the project success. Understanding these influences and developing a
project profile creates a foundation for building an effective project execution plan.

The DPCI is one model for understanding and profiling projects. This index assesses the complexity level of key components of a
project and produces a unique project profile. The profile indicates the project complexity level, which provides a benchmark for
comparing projects and provides information about the characteristics of a project that can then be addressed in the project
execution plan.

The DPCI provides project stakeholders with information about the project to define the experience, knowledge, skills, and abilities
needed by the project manager. The DPCI also has implications for the composition, organization, and skills needed by the project
leadership team. The DPCI provides information and a context for developing the project execution plan and for assessing the
probability of success.

Key Takeaways
    Complex systems have many different parts that interact with each other in different and often unpredictable ways. They adapt
    to changes in their external and internal environments.
    The Darnall-Preston Complexity Index (DPCI) groups project attributes into four categories: external attributes, internal
    attributes, technological complexity, and environmental attributes.

2.3.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24666
Exercises

 1. Complex systems _____ to changes in their external and internal environments.
 2. The Darnall-Preston Complexity Index (DPCI) groups project attributes into four categories: external, internal, _________, and

    environmental.
 3. What are the characteristics of a system that make it complex?

Complex Systems

Consider the example of the drug manufacturing facility. Describe in your own words how this project demonstrated the attributes
of a complex system.

    External
    Internal
    Technological
    Environmental

References

Gould, S. J., Full House: The Spread of Excellence from Plato to Darwin (New York: Three Rivers Press, 1996).

This page titled 2.3: Complex Systems and the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored,
remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

2.3.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24666
2.4: Darnall-Preston Complexity Index Structure

  Learning Objectives

    1. Describe each of the external attributes that contribute to project complexity.
    2. Describe each of the internal attributes that contribute to project complexity.
    3. Describe each of the technological attributes that contribute to project complexity.
    4. Describe each of the environmental attributes that contribute to project complexity.

The Darnall-Preston Complexity Index (DPCITM) is designed to develop a project profile that reflects different aspects of the
project that will influence the approach to leading and executing the project. The DPCI is built on four categories of attributes:

 1. External. Environmental attributes that are in existence at the beginning of the project, such as size, duration, and available
    resources

 2. Internal. Clarity of project objectives, the clarity of scope, the organizational complexity, and stakeholder agreement
 3. Technological. Newness of the technology and familiarity of team members with the technology
 4. Environmental. Legal, cultural, political, and ecological

The DPCI was developed around four assumptions:

 1. All projects are unique.
 2. Projects have common characteristics.
 3. These characteristics can be grouped together to create a project profile.
 4. There is an optimum execution approach for each project profile and therefore an optimum set of skills and experience for the

    project manager and execution team.

External Attributes

The external attributes include those issues that are typically established early in the project definition phase and are usually outside
the direct control of the project management team. The project size can be a product of the dollars needed to execute the project or
project cost. The cost of the project is estimated during the conceptual phase of the project. At the time the project is authorized, the
cost or size of the project is established. The duration or time allocated to complete the project and the resources available are also
attributes that are established when the project is authorized.

Size

Project size is a relative concept. How do we decide if something is large or small? A 150-pound person is big if the person is ten
years old. A 150-pound person is small if the person is a professional football lineman. The frame of reference provides the context
in which size is determined.

The size of a project is also relative. A $250 million oil refinery expansion is a relatively small project in an industry where billion
dollar projects are common. A $250 million pharmaceutical development project or software development project would be
considered a large project. The size of a project is determined by the context of the industry and the experience of the team
executing the project.

Within the construction industry, firms usually specialize in projects that fall within a defined range. Small firms usually execute
small projects and large firms usually execute larger projects. There is a size range for which the company experience, management
skills, tools, and work processes are primarily designed. This size range or comfort zone exists for both the company and the
members of the project team executing the project.

When a project team executes a project outside their comfort zone, stress is placed on both the tools and project team. When a
project is larger than the comfort zone of a company, stresses are placed on the ability to provide experience and appropriate work
processes, and the results are typically cost overruns and schedule delays. To mitigate this stress, some companies will divide large
projects into smaller projects and execute the smaller projects with separate dedicated staff and resources. The key to success then
becomes the coordination of the small projects to behave as if they are one large project.

2.4.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24667
  Copper Mining in Argentina

  One example of this process was a copper mining project in Argentina. The comfort zone of the company was projects ranging
  from $150 million to $500 million. Projects over $500 million were divided into smaller projects. The mining project was
  estimated to cost a little over $1 billion and the project was divided into three projects, each with a project manager and
  leadership team. Although the projects shared some resources and reported to an oversight project manager, each project
  developed a separate execution plan that included a budget and schedule.

When a company is executing a project that is much smaller than the company norm, resources are often misused and inappropriate
work processes are utilized. The result often increases the project costs. Some companies with a history of executing large projects
have set up a small project group to execute smaller projects. These groups establish a different culture, develop appropriate work
processes, and use tools designed to execute smaller projects.

The more the project size is outside the comfort zone of the project, the more stress is created for the project. This is true on both
ends of the spectrum. Both smaller and larger projects that fall outside the comfort zone of the project management team will create
stress for the project. New skills, tools, and processes will need to be developed to manage the project, and this activity will absorb
management time and energy. The higher the stress level created by executing a project outside the comfort zone of the
organization, the greater the impact on the complexity level of the project.

Duration

The duration of a project is often set by the parent organization that charters the project with a deadline that reflects the business
purpose of the project. The following are examples of projects with end dates that are established to meet the organization's
business purpose:

The project team also estimates the duration of the project and establishes a project end date based on normal work (e.g., forty
hours per week) and the availability of resources.

Sometimes the normal time needed to complete a project is longer than the time available.

  Super Bowl Hotel Space

  The investors in a planned hotel start booking rooms for an upcoming Super Bowl weekend a year before the hotel is finished.
  This is six weeks ahead of the time estimated to build and open the hotel. People will be working overtime, suppliers will be
  paid a bonus to supply materials early, and management is meeting with city officials to expedite permitting issues. A new
  project schedule is developed based on these changes to the execution approach, and now the project schedule has zero float.

The result of this six-week compression to the project schedule is additional stress on the project. Significant management time and
energy will be invested in tracking and managing schedule issues. Every issue that arises will need to be resolved quickly and
involve the project's senior manager to assure the project schedule does not slip. This additional stress increases the overall project
complexity.

    A new software program for a university to be implemented in time for registering students in the fall
    A new product to be introduced to the marketplace at the industry's major conference
    A new high school to be constructed and open next fall

Resource Availability

Projects require both human and tangible resources. The project requires people with the right experience, knowledge, and skills to
accomplish the assigned tasks. Construction projects typically require resources such as bricks and cranes. Some projects require
specialized subcontractors with skills not found within the project team. Each of these resources required by the project will be
needed at the point in the project schedule when the materials or skills are required. When these resources are scarce or not
available, additional management time and energy is needed.

2.4.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24667
  Boeing Dreamliner

  In 2003, Boeing announced the development of the new 787 Dreamliner Airplane. The airframe for the new airplane was a new
  composite material. During the same period that Boeing was beginning construction of the new manufacturing facility, other
  new planes were announced, and the Air Force increased its demand for people with airplane manufacturing and maintenance
  experience. A project was chartered to train the people the new plant would need to manufacture the Boeing Dreamliner. The
  project manager found that the people with the skills and knowledge needed to develop the curriculum and train the workers
  were in short supply. In addition to the lack of skilled trainers, the materials needed for the workers to train on were also
  scarce. The project manager dedicated significant time and energy developing the resources the project needed.

When resources needed to execute the project are not readily available, the project leadership dedicates more management time and
energy to acquiring the resources or finding innovative solutions to accomplish the project goals without the needed resources or
with creative alternative solutions. The more time and energy the management team must dedicate to searching for resources or
alternatives, the more stress on the project. The more scarce and more important the resources, the more stress that is placed on the
project.

Internal Attributes

The internal attributes are within the control or influence of the project manager. Internal attributes include clarity of objectives,
clarity of scope, the organizational complexity, and stakeholder agreement. Although the clarity of objectives, as with the other
attributes, can be improved during the life of the project, the project profile reflects the project at a given time. If the project
objectives are not clear during the evaluation of the project, this lack of clarity impacts the complexity of the project.

Clarity of the Project Objectives

Project decisions are made based on how these decisions help the project meet its objectives. If the objectives are unclear, the team
will not make the best decisions. The greater the confusion for the project team on the goals and objectives of the project, the
greater the impact on the complexity of the project.

  Confusion Over Objectives in Philadelphia

  A consultant was asked to evaluate the likelihood of success of a large project in Philadelphia. The consultant interviewed the
  project leadership and asked if the goals of the projects were clear. Each member of the leadership team responded that the
  goals and objectives were clear. When asked what the goals were, the answers varied greatly.

  Clarity of Objectives Saves Millions

  A critical piece of equipment was being fabricated in Europe for a construction project in South America. The cost to transport
  the equipment by air was $200,000 more than by ship. Transporting the equipment by ship would also delay the project two
  months. Early in the project, it was determined that any delay in the project would cost the project over $1 million per month.
  Because the goals of the project were well understood, the decision to transport the equipment by air was made quickly and
  easily.

  Island Ecology Protected

  A large mining company initiated a copper mining project on an ecologically sensitive island in Indonesia. The company stated
  very clearly and forcefully that every effort would be made on the project to protect both the human and natural environment
  of the island during construction and operation. Every major decision passed through an evaluation of the impact on the island
  ecology. Although the island ecology increased the complexity of the project, the clear goals mediated the project complexity.

Clarity of Scope

The project scope defines what is inside the project and what is outside. Does the project to train five hundred technicians for the
Boeing 787 include recruiting and assessing potential employees? The project scope did include recruitment and assessment, but

2.4.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24667
hiring processes and drug testing belonged to Boeing. This scope was clear about which responsibilities belonged to the contractor
doing the training and which responsibilities belonged to the parent organization.

Not all project scopes are this clear. The development of a clear project scope depends on information available about what
products and services will be required. A project to develop a vaccine for a new strain of flu may not include sufficient information
to develop the processes the team will utilize to understand the flu virus and develop a vaccine. As the team develops more
information, the scope can be further developed.

Leadership time and energy will be focused on developing scope clarity. The lack of clarity and the amount of time needed by the
leadership team to develop a clear scope will add to the project complexity.

Organizational Complexity

The structure of the project's client organization and the organizational decision-making processes influence the project
complexity. A project with one client as the central point for making decisions and providing client approvals and technical
information has only one relationship to manage and a streamlined communication process. Projects with a team representing the
client require more of the project manager's time and energy managing the client relationships and communication process. The
client team approach brings more expertise and often more comprehensive project oversight, but it adds to the project complexity.

Stakeholder Agreement

Often there is more than one major stakeholder in the project. An increase in the number of stakeholders adds stress to the project
and influences the project's complexity level. The business or emotional investment of the stakeholder in the project and the ability
of the stakeholder to influence the project outcomes or execution approach will also influence the stakeholder complexity of the
project. In addition to the number of stakeholders and their level of investment, the degree in which the project stakeholders agree
or disagree also influences the complexity of the project.

A small commercial construction project will typically have several stakeholders in addition to the client. All the building
permitting agencies, environmental agencies, and labor and safety agencies have an interest in the project and can influence the
execution plan of the project. The neighbors will have an interest in the architectural appeal, the noise, and the purpose of the
building.

  Tire Plant in India

  A U.S. chemical company chartered a project team to design and build a plant to produce the raw materials for building truck
  tires designed for nonpaved roads. The plant was to be built in India a few years after an accident that killed several Indians
  and involved a different U.S. chemical company. When the company announced the new project and began to break ground,
  the community backlash was so strong that the project was shut down. A highly involved stakeholder can significantly
  influence your project.

  Wind Turbine on a College Campus

  A small college in South Carolina won a competitive grant to erect and operate a wind turbine on campus. The engineering
  department submitted the grant as a demonstration project for engineering students to expose students to wind technology. The
  campus facilities department found only one location for the wind turbine that would not disrupt the flow of traffic on campus.
  The engineering department found that location unacceptable for students who had to maintain the wind turbine. The county
  construction permitting department had no policies for permitting a wind turbine and would not provide a building permit. The
  college had to go to the county council and get an exception to county rules. The marketing department wanted the wind
  turbine placed in a highly visible location to promote the innovativeness of the college.

Each of the college's stakeholders had a legitimate interest in the location of the wind turbine. The number of stakeholders on the
project, multiplied by their passion for the subject and the lack of agreement on the location, increased the complexity of the
project. Significant time and resources of the project will be dedicated to identifying, understanding, and managing client
expectations.

2.4.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24667
Technological Complexity

The technology of a project refers to the product of the project and not the technology used to manage the project. This technology
is typically unique to the industry. A pharmaceutical project technology is the drug-making technology or pharmacology. The
technology for a project to build a new automobile plant is the car production process. The key stress on the project is the newness
of the technology. What aspects of the technology are known, and what aspects are unknown? Does the project combine
technologies on the project that have never been combined?

Project technology that is newer and more complex will require more technological expertise on the project team.

  Family Life Center

  A church in western New York decided to build a new family life center that would not use electricity from the power grid. The
  charter of the project included statements that required the building to use renewable power sources and have an
  environmentally friendly footprint. The project required the adaptation of a new technology for producing and managing
  power, location of the building relative to the sun, and landscaping to minimize water usage. Most of the technology was
  tested, and the project team brought in experts to help design and implement a program to meet the requirements of the project.
  The technology of the project required the project team to develop a new understanding of this technology and work processes
  to adapt the project to address the requirement of the technology.

Typically, the newer the technology and the less familiar the project team is with the technology, the greater the stress and the
contribution to the complexity of the project.

Project Environment

The project environment includes all the issues related to the environment that will influence the development and execution of the
project plan. A project to build an airport expansion in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania will have very different legal, cultural, political,
and ecological issues to address from an airport expansion in So Paolo, Brazil. The environment attributes in Brazil require more
planning, resources, and leadership attention to successfully execute the project. The greater the number and difficulty of the issues,
the greater the influence on the complexity of the project.

Legal

The legal issues on a project can be broad and include many different levels of government. Most local governments have various
permits, such as business licenses and building permits, required to do work. Some projects will have security issues and will work
with local law enforcement.

Workforce laws vary significantly in country, regional, and local jurisdictions. The hiring and management of workers can be a
complex and time-consuming issue for some projects. Companies not used to working in a union environment will invest project
resources in learning and adapting to the new environment. Scheduling holidays, supporting maternity leave, and dealing with
workforce reduction issues surrounding project closeout will vary in each environment, industry, and project. Understanding and
managing workforce issues on a project can be simple or very complex.

National, regional, and local taxes require a project tax approach or policy on most international projects and some domestic
projects. Duties for equipment and material brought into a country add complexity to the procurement plan. Equipment used
temporarily to execute the project, such as a crane, is treated differently than permanently installed equipment, such as a pump. In
some countries, a third party is hired to expedite the flow of materials through complex custom processes.

  Copper Mining in Argentina

  The new president of Argentina instituted a program to encourage economic development. One of the projects to support this
  program was a copper mining project in northern Argentina. This is the desert area of Argentina with a basic agrarian economy.
  A joint venture was formed with the encouragement of the Argentina government between a Canadian and Australian
  Company with all three entities owning a share of the new company.

2.4.5  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24667
    The conceptual design work was done in Canada with support from offices in Chile, Argentina, and the United States. A U.S.
    contractor was awarded the contract to design, procure equipment, and build the mine. The project leadership team included
    members from the United States, Canada, Australia, Argentina, Chile, Puerto Rico, Cuba, and Lebanon. Materials were
    procured, transported, and brought through customs from twenty-one different countries. Legal issues on this project consumed
    a great deal of management attention and sometimes affected the project execution. Materials were occasionally delayed in
    customs, people with critical skills could not get visas to enter Argentina, and which country's laws would apply to the contracts
    had to be debated.

Not every project will have significant legal issues. When legal issues are involved, they are typically significant and will add to
the complexity of the project. Understanding the legal issues than can affect the project and developing a plan to address these
issues will reduce the complexity of the project.

Cultural

Culture is a term that reflects the community's assumptions, norms, values, and artifacts. Community includes the parent
organization charting the project, the local community or communities where the project is executed, and the region and country
where the project is located. The project team must understand the community's culture and its potential impact on the project.

Culture also defines the meaning of work, truth, the value of nature, relationships, and how to communicate. Projects executed in
various cultures will often experience cultural conflict.

  Gender Difficulties in Argentina

  A project team from the United States was responsible for executing a project in Argentina. The U.S. leadership team included
  women in key leadership positions, and the Argentines refused to take direction from females. The U.S. team believed strongly
  in their leadership capability and refused to make changes. This conflict was settled by senior managers of both organizations,
  and rules were established that respected all team members in leadership roles. The conflict did not go away, but the team was
  able to successfully execute the project with the original team. Delays were experienced on the project that could be traced to
  this cultural conflict.

Many organizations have rule-based cultures. Institutions of higher learning, organizations related to judicial organizations, and
most government organizations are examples of rule-based organizations. The organizational structure and culture inhibits risk
taking through established rules and policies. Projects are goal based and focus on plans and processes to achieve goals. Goal-based
cultures promote assuming risk to achieve goals. Projects that are closely tied to a rule-based parent organization will often find
conflict with the parent organization's need to follow rules and the project's need to accomplish goals. This conflict creates
additional stress that adds to the project complexity.

On global projects, language, cultural conflict with the role of women, the religious role in daily activities, and even the concept of
time can becomes issues on the project. These issues require project leadership to resolve and they add to the project complexity. In
some countries and even different companies in the same country, meetings start on time, and a person arriving five minutes late
will cause major disruption. In other situations, meetings can start within thirty minutes of the starting time without anyone
objecting.

  Communication Problem in India

  A team of project experts was sent to India to evaluate a large construction project. The team arrived and reviewed the project
  documents and found the project on time and meeting all project goals. After spending three days with various contractors and
  team managers, the team discovered the project was significantly behind schedule and would miss an important window during
  the monsoon season. A culture existed on the project where workers told the project management what they expected to hear,
  and the difference between the progress of the project team and the progress reports became so large that the difference could
  not be reconciled during the original schedule of the project.

An increase in the number of cultures represented on the project team raises the cultural complexity. Increases in the number of
cultures with which the project team must interface also increase the complexity of a project. Although this cultural diversity

2.4.6  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24667
creates leadership challenges, it also presents opportunities. The diversity of cultures presents various approaches to solving
problems, and the project manager may find innovative solutions easier to develop with a diverse project team.

Political

Every project operates within one or more communities that reflect organizational dynamics and power struggles. The more
important the project is to the organizational leadership, the more invested various organizational leaders will be in the project. The
more people that become invested in the project and the more influence these people exhibit on the resources and activities of the
project, the more time and energy will be expended by the project team in managing these outside influences. This additional stress
on project leadership time and resources adds complexity to the project.

  Stakeholders and a Bridge Project

  The Department of Highways chartered a project to upgrade a number of bridges that crossed the interstate in one of the larger
  cities in South Carolina. The closing of these bridges severely impacted traffic congestion, including a large shopping mall.
  The contract included provisions for minimizing the impact on the traffic and communities near the construction areas. This
  provision allowed businesses or interested parties to review the project schedule and make suggestions that would lessen the
  impact of the construction. The project leadership invested significant time and resources in developing alignment among the
  various political stakeholders on the project approach and schedule.

Ecological

Projects have the potential to impact the living conditions or the health of people, plants, and animals. In addition to the potential
impact to land, water, and air, the ecology includes the sights and sounds that can impact the quality of life. An increasing number
of clients expect the project team to minimize the impact of the project on the ecology. An ecology that is more sensitive to
disruption and a more disruptive technology will place greater stress on the project and increase the project complexity.
Construction projects that require the use of explosions to effectively move rocks and dirt, projects that require the addition of
twenty-five people in existing office space, and projects that require the release of strong odors like those from adhesives in an
office environment will all impact the ecology. The project team develops means and methods to minimize the impact of the
disruption in a manner consistent with the requirements as communicated by the client. The effort that is needed to minimize the
ecological impact will influence the complexity of the project.

The ecology will also impact the execution of a project. The weather is an attribute of most construction projects. Construction
projects in India are often scheduled around the monsoon season, and construction projects in the Caribbean consider the hurricane
season. A project to build an offshore wind farm will require an understanding of the ocean currents, the wind currents, and
temperature fluctuation to understand the impact of the ecology on the project execution plan.

The larger the number of potential ecological attributes and the greater the impact of each attribute, the greater the influence on the
project complexity.

Key Takeaways
    The external attributes are the relative size of the project, duration of the project, and the available resources.
    The internal attributes are the clarity of its scope, the complexity of the organization, and the agreement among stakeholders.
    The technological attributes are the technology of the product (not the technology used to manage the project), the newness of
    the technology, and the familiarity of the team with the technology.
    The environmental attributes are the legal issues, cultural conflicts, political interests, the impact of the project on the ecology,
    and the impact of the ecology on the project.

Exercises

 1. The external attributes considered in the DPCI are relative size, ________, and available resources.
 2. The internal attributes considered in the DPCI are clarity of scope, complexity of the organization, and agreement among

    _________.
 3. The technological attributes considered in the DPCI are ______ of the technology and familiarity of the team with the

    technology.

2.4.7  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24667
 4. The environmental attributes considered in the DPCI are _____, cultural, political, impact on the ecology, and impact of the
    ecology on the project.

 5. Under what circumstances would a large project qualify for a low DPCI score?
 6. Describe an organization structure that would receive a high score for complexity.
 7. Does the technology attribute refer to the technology used by the project team or the project itself?
 8. Give an example of a cultural problem that would have a high-complexity score.
 9. Give an example of an ecological problem that would have a high-complexity score.
10. What is the difference between an external and an internal attribute in the DPCI?

Behind the Scenes

    Stanley Portny (Portny, 2007) advocates that as a project manager, you research the source of a project to determine who had
    the original idea by asking questions of your boss, reading meeting minutes and feasibility studies, and checking other
    correspondence and contacts. The purpose of this investigation is to find out who is most likely to champion the project if you
    have trouble, who opposed the project, or whose interests will be harmed by the project. Consider this advice in light of the
    Darnall-Preston Complexity Index and answer the following questions:

        Is this an external, internal, technological or environmental attribute? Explain your reasoning and refer to the definitions
        provided. A case can be made for putting it in more than one.
        What might you find that would increase the project's complexity and what might you find out that would reduce the
        complexity? Provide examples of each.

References

    Portny, S. E., Project Management for Dummies, 2nd ed. (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2007).

This page titled 2.4: Darnall-Preston Complexity Index Structure is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

2.4.8  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24667
2.5: Exercises

Exercises at the end of the chapter are designed to strengthen your understanding and retention of the information recently acquired
in the chapter.

Essay Questions

Write several paragraphs to provide more in-depth analysis and consideration when answering the following questions.

 1. Compare the attributes used by the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index and those used by Youker. Which attributes are used in
    both typologies? Which attributes are not in common? If you chose to add one attribute to either typology what would it be?
    Explain your answer.

 2. Complex systems. A complex system adapts to changes in its external and internal characteristics. Describe a project with which
    you are familiar that has experienced changes in its external or internal characteristics during the life of the project and describe
    how the project manager and the management team changed their behavior to adapt to the new situation or how they failed to
    adapt and the result of that failure.

Discussion

The exercises in this section are designed to promote exchange of information among students in the classroom or in an online
discussion. The exercises are more open ended, which means that what you find might be completely different from what your
classmates find, and you can all benefit by sharing what you have learned.

 1. Institutional memory. One of the responsibilities of a project manager is to keep a history of past projects to create an
    organizational knowledge base. Do you think using the DPCITM as a basis for organizing those past projects would be useful?
    How would you go about creating a storage and retrieval system that uses the DPCI?

 2. Environmental impact. Describe a project that might have an impact on the environment and the steps the project manager
    might have to take. Describe the score you would give this attribute if you were using the DPCI.

This page titled 2.5: Exercises is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

2.5.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24668
2.6: Software and Technology Exercise

  Learning Objectives

    1. Calculate and interpret the DPCI.

Calculate the DPCI

Russell Darnall (Darnall 1996) introduced a method that rates characteristics of a project on a scale from 1 to 5. The characteristics
are grouped into four categories: external attributes, internal attributes, technology, and project environment. Each category is rated
based on the average of the scores of its attributes.

A method of calculating and representing the final Darnall-Preston Complexity Index (DPCI) was added by John Preston and
Darnall in this publication to allow the DPCI to be represented by a four-number code. The rules for calculating the DPCI are as
follows:

 1. The scores in each category are averaged and then rounded to a whole number to create a category rating.
 2. Averages that are halfway between two whole numbers are rounded up.
 3. If one of the characteristics has a score that is higher than the average for that category by 2 or more, the average for that

    category is shown in boldface.

A project can be quickly characterized using the DPCI. For example, a project that is similar in size to previous projects with plenty
of time to complete it and with adequate resources available would have a low average external complexity score of 2 (see Table
2.1 "Calculating the DPCI"). If there is significant disagreement among the stakeholders on the objectives and several scope issues
are not well defined because there is overlap between responsibilities of groups within the organization, the internal complexity
score would be high--4 (see Table 2.1 "Calculating the DPCI"). If the project relies on technology that is fairly new and some of
the team members are unfamiliar with it, the average score would be 2.5, rounded up to 3 (see Table 2.1 "Calculating the DPCI").
If the legal and cultural attributes have low complexity, and there is little impact on the project by ecological factors, the average is
low--2--in spite of a high complexity score for the effect of politics of the project. In this case, the score is shown in boldface to
warn the user that there is an individual score that is at least two points higher than the average, and the details of that category
must be investigated.

Table 2.1 Calculating the DPCI

2.6.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24669
Category       Attribute              Score  Average  Rating  DPCI
External       Size                   2      2        2       2.4.3.2
               Duration               1
Internal                                     3.75     4
               Resource               2
Technological  availability                  2.5      3
Environmental  Clarity of objectives  4
               Clarity of scope       3      2        2
               Organizational
               complexity             4

               Stakeholder            4
               agreement
               Newness                2
               Familiarity of team    3
                                      2
               Legal                  1
               Culture                4
               Political              1

               Ecological

The final DPCI in this example is 2.4.3.2, which tells you at a glance that this project has fairly low external complexity, a fairly
high degree of internal complexity, and a moderate technological complexity and that a majority of the environmental attributes are
low complexity, but at least one of them has a rating of 4 or 5 and needs attention.

Projects with different profiles require different management approaches, applications of different tools, and mitigation of different
levels of risk. Information derived from the complexity profile can be used in the selection of the project manager, the project
leadership team, and the execution approach to the project and in the analysis of the project risk.

There is no generally agreed-upon project typology or classification system. In this text, we will utilize the DPCI as a tool for
analyzing projects and choosing appropriate tools, but the same skills could be used with other taxonomies.

How to Calculate a DPCI Rating

Assume that a project went through the DPCI rating process and it achieved the following scores in each attribute:

Table 2.2 Calculating the DPCI

                                             2.6.2            https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24669
Category       Attribute              Score  Average  Rating  DPCI
External       Size                   1
               Duration               1
Internal
               Resource               2
Technological  availability
Environmental  Clarity of objectives  1
               Clarity of scope       4
               Organizational
               complexity             4

               Stakeholder            3
               agreement
               Newness                3
               Familiarity            2
                                      2
               Legal                  1
               Culture                4
               Political              1

               Ecological

 1. Start a spreadsheet program such as Excel 2010. Refer to Table 2.2 "Calculating the DPCI" and then type the category and
    subcategory labels into the first two columns and the scores in column C. Some of the labels will appear to be cut off if there is
    not enough width to display the entire label, as shown in Figure 2.9 "Labels in a Spreadsheet".

 2. Click cell B15 and then type your name.
 3. Capture a screen that shows the worksheet at this point in its development with your name in cell B15. (Refer to Section 1.7

    "Web Exercise" and Section 1.8 "Software and Technology Exercises", if necessary, for instruction on how to capture a screen.)
 4. Open a new word processing document and then paste the screen capture into the new document. Your name must be included

    in the screen capture. Save the document as Ch02DPCIStudentName using the Word 2003 .doc file format.
 5. Move the mouse pointer to the boundary between the headers of columns A and B, where it turns into a double-headed pointer.

    Double-click the boundary to automatically adjust the column width to the widest label, as shown in Figure 2.10 "Adjust
    Column Width". Alternatively, drag the boundary to the right to adjust the column width manually.
 6. Repeat the skill you practiced in the previous step to widen column B to accommodate the longest label (or your name) in
    column B.
 7. Click cell D3. Type =AVERAGE(C1:C3) and then press Enter. The average of numbers in cells C1, C2, and C3 is calculated and
    displayed in cell D3. A sequence of cells is denoted by the first cell address and the last cell address separated by a colon.
 8. Click cell D7. Type =AVERAGE(C4:C7) and then press Enter.
 9. Use the skill you practiced in the previous steps to calculate the averages of the technological and environmental categories and
    display them in cells D9 and D13 respectively.
10. Click cell D13. Notice the formula displays in the formula bar, as shown in Figure 2.11 "Adjusted Column Widths and Average
    Functions" (You may ignore the alert boxes or notations due to the unused cells in column D.)
11. Capture this screen and then paste it into the word processing document Ch02DPCIStudentName below the previously captured
    screen.
12. In the spreadsheet, click cell E3. Type =ROUND(D3,0) and then press Enter. The ROUND function requires two types of
    information. The first is a cell address and the second is the decimal place to which the number in that cell will be rounded. A

                                             2.6.3            https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24669
    zero indicates rounding to whole numbers. (See the spreadsheet Help menu if you would like more information about the
    ROUND function.)
13. Use the skill you practiced in the previous step to calculate the rounded values for each category. Click cell E13 to display the
    ROUND function in the formula bar, as shown in Figure 2.12 "Round Function Rounds to the Nearest Whole Number". Notice
    the ROUND function in cell E9 rounded the number 2.5 up to 3. This is the method used for rounding in the DPCI.
14. Capture this screen and paste it into Ch02DPCIStudentName.doc.
15. In cell B16, type DPCI rating:. In cell C16, type the DPCI rating 1.3.3.2 and then press Enter.
16. Visually examine the individual scores in column C and the rounded averages in column E. Determine if any of the individual
    scores is 2 points or more higher than the rounded average. Notice that the political rating is 4, and the environmental rating is
    2. Also notice that the clarity of objectives rating is 1 and the internal rating is 3. According to the DPCI method, the
    environmental rating should be displayed in bold. (Even though the internal rating has a score that is 2 points lower than the
    rounded average, it is not bold. An individual rating must be 2 points or more higher than the rounded average--not lower.)
17. Click cell C16. On the formula bar, select the 2 and then on the ribbon (or formatting toolbar) click the Bold button. The rating
    for environmental complexity is emphasized with bold font to indicate there is a significantly higher individual rating that
    should be considered, as shown in Figure 2.13 "Ratings That Contain Higher Individual Ratings Are Bold".
18. Capture this screen and paste it into Ch02DPCIStudentName.doc. Save and close Ch02DPCIStudentName.doc.
19. In the spreadsheet, save the file as Ch02DPCIStudentName.xls using the Excel 2003 .xls file format.
20. Close the spreadsheet.
21. Review your word processing file, Ch02DPCIStudentName.doc and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

Element                      Best                            Adequate                          Poor

File name                    Ch02DPCIStudentName.doc Word 2010 .docx version                   Other file name or format

Calculate and interpret the  Sequence of screen captures     One or two screens taken out      Only one image of the finished
DPCI                         shows the development of the    of the exact sequence             spreadsheet; development by
                                                             described; student name
                             spreadsheet                                                       the student not proven
                                                             displayed clearly in each of the
                                                             development screens

22. Review your spreadsheet file, Ch02DPCIStudentName.xls, and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

Element                      Best                            Adequate                          Poor

File name                    Ch02DPCIStudentName.xls Excel 2010 version using .xlsx Other file name

Calculate and interpret the  AVERAGE and ROUND               AVERAGE and ROUND                 Incorrect ranges in the
DPCI                         functions used correctly; bold  functions not in the cells        functions; last number in the
                             feature used correctly          specified but used the correct    DPCI rating not bold
                                                             ranges

23. Submit the file(s) as directed by the instructor.

This page titled 2.6: Software and Technology Exercise is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                   2.6.4                                                       https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24669
CHAPTER OVERVIEW

3: Project Phases and Organization

  3.1: Project Phases
  3.2: Project Organization
  3.3: Using the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index to Measure Organizational Complexity
  3.4: Exercises
  3.5: Web Exercise
This page titled 3: Project Phases and Organization is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                                                                              1
3.1: Project Phases

  Learning Objectives

    1. Identify the phases of a project.
    2. Describe the types of activities in each phase of a project.

Projects, by definition, have a beginning and an end. They also have defined phases between the project kickoff and project
closeout. A phase represents a grouping of similar activities that has a very loosely defined beginning and end. Phases are also
typically sequential, where the prior phase is essentially complete before the beginning of the next phase. Phases do not have clear-
cut end dates and some activities in an early phase of the project will continue into the later phases. This is in contrast to project
beginning and ending dates and milestone dates, which do have clearly defined dates with the expectation that these dates will be
met.

Initiation

The initiation phase of a project represents the activities associated with starting up the project. Activities during the initiation
phase include project kickoff meetings, identifying the project team, developing the resources needed to develop the project plan,
and identifying and acquiring the project management infrastructure (space, computers). On projects where the scope of work for
the project is not well defined, the project team will invest time and resources in developing a clearer scope of work. On projects
where the major project stakeholders are not aligned, the project team will expend resources and time creating stakeholder
alignment.

The activities that occur within the initiation phase of the project vary on each project. They include all the activities necessary to
begin planning the project. The initiation phase typically begins with the assignment of the project manager and ends when the
project team has sufficient information to begin developing a detailed schedule and budget. Unlike project milestones, some
activities associated with project initiation may be delayed without delaying the end of the project. For example, it is advantageous
for the project to have the major project stakeholders aligned from the beginning, but sometimes it is difficult to get the
commitment from stakeholders to invest the time and resources to engage in an alignment process. Sometimes it is only after
stakeholders begin observing progress on a project that the project manager can facilitate the stakeholder alignment processes.

The knowledge, skills, and experience needed on the project can vary in each phase. During the early phases of a project, the
project leadership needs good conceptual skills, the ability to build a team, and the experience to build a project roadmap. During
project closeout, the project leadership provides a high degree of motivation and attention to details. On a large project, lasting two
or more years, it is common to see the project management team change leadership to provide skills that are appropriate to the final
phases of the project.

The Project Management Institute (Project Management Institute, Inc., 2008) identifies four major phases of a project as
characteristics of the project life cycle. These four life-cycle phases are initiation, planning, execution, and project closeout. The
initiation phase, which PMI labels "starting the project," includes all the activities necessary to start the project. These activities
include holding the project kickoff meeting, confirming or developing conceptual schedules and budgets, and acquiring project
execution resources such as office space, computers, and communications equipment.

Planning

The planning phase, which PMI labels "organizing and preparing," includes the development of more detailed schedules and a
budget. The planning also includes developing detailed staffing, procurement, and project controls plans. The emphasis of the
planning phase is to develop an understanding of how the project will be executed and a plan for acquiring the resources needed to
execute it. Although much of the planning activity takes place during the planning phase, the project plan will continue to be
adjusted to respond to new challenges and opportunities. Planning activities occur during the entire life of the project.

Execution

The execution phase, labeled by PMI as "carrying out the work," includes the major activities needed to accomplish the work of the
project. On a construction project, this would include the design and construction activities. On an information technology (IT)

3.1.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24670
project, this would include the development of the software code. On a training project, this would include the development and
delivery of the training.

Closeout

The closeout phase--or using PMI's nomenclature, "closing of the project"--represents the final stage of a project. Project staff is
transferred off the project, project documents are archived, and the final few items or punch list is completed. The project client
takes control of the product of the project, and the project office is closed down.

The amount of resources and the skills needed to implement each phase of the project depends on the project profile. Typically, a
project with a higher-complexity profile requires more skills and resources during the initiation phase. Projects with a profile that
indicates problems with alignment among key stakeholders or political and legal issues will require specialized resources to
develop plans that address these issues early in the project. A project with a lower complexity level will invest more resources in
the execution phases to execute the project as effectively and efficiently as possible.

  Project Phases on a Large Multinational Project

  A United States Construction company won a contract to design and build the first copper mine in northern Argentina. There
  was no existing infrastructure for either the mining industry or large construction projects in this part of South America. During
  the initiation phase of the project, the project manager focused on defining and finding a project leadership team with the
  knowledge, skills, and experience to manage a large complex project in a remote area of the globe. The project team set up
  three offices. One was in Chile, where large mining construction project infrastructure existed. The other two were in
  Argentina. One was in Buenos Aries to establish relationships and Argentinean expertise, and the second was in Catamarca--
  the largest town close to the mine site. With offices in place, the project start-up team began developing procedures for getting
  work done, acquiring the appropriate permits, and developing relationships with Chilean and Argentine partners.

During the planning phase, the project team developed an integrated project schedule that coordinated the activities of the design,
procurement, and construction teams. The project controls team also developed a detailed budget that enabled the project team to
track project expenditures against the expected expenses. The project design team built on the conceptual design and developed
detailed drawings for use by the procurement team. The procurement team used the drawings to begin ordering equipment and
materials for the construction team; to develop labor projections; to refine the construction schedule; and to set up the construction
site. Although planning is a never-ending process on a project, the planning phase focused on developing sufficient details to allow
various parts of the project team to coordinate their work and to allow the project management team to make priority decisions. The
execution phase represents the work done to meet the requirements of the scope of work and fulfill the charter. During the
execution phase, the project team accomplished the work defined in the plan and made adjustments when the project factors
changed. Equipment and materials were delivered to the work site, labor was hired and trained, a construction site was built, and all
the construction activities, from the arrival of the first dozer to the installation of the final light switch, were accomplished. The
closeout phase included turning over the newly constructed plant to the operations team of the client. A punch list of a few
remaining construction items was developed and those items completed. The office in Catamarca was closed, the office in Buenos
Aries archived all the project documents, and the Chilean office was already working on the next project. The accounting books
were reconciled and closed, final reports written and distributed, and the project manager started on a new project.

Key Takeaways
    The phases of a project are initiation, planning, execution, and closeout.
    The initiation phase, which PMI calls "starting the project," includes activities such as holding alignment and kickoff meetings,
    identifying the project team, developing the resources needed to develop the project plan, and identifying and acquiring the
    project management infrastructure.
    The planning phase, which PMI calls "organizing and preparing," includes developing detailed staffing, procurement, and
    project controls plans.
    The execution phase, which PMI calls "carrying out the work," includes the major activities needed to accomplish the work of
    the project.

3.1.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24670
    The closeout phase, which PMI calls "closing of the project," includes transferring staff, archiving documents, closing offices,
    completing punch list tasks, and turning over the results of the project to the client.

Exercises

 1. Completing the items on a punch list occurs during the _________ phase.
 2. The ______ phase includes start-up activities and is called "starting the project" by PMI.
 3. The phase in which the project work is mainly accomplished is the _______ phase.
 4. How does the initiation phase differ from the planning phase?
 5. What is a punch list and in which phase is it used?
 6. What are the four phases of a project?

Project Phases

    Consider a personal project that you have been involved with in the last few years, such as moving your residence, buying a car,
    or changing jobs. Describe the activities related to that project that fit into each of the four project phases.

References

Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK Guide), 4th ed. (Newtown
Square, PA: Project Management Institute, Inc., 2008), 11-16.

This page titled 3.1: Project Phases is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

3.1.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24670
3.2: Project Organization

  Learning Objectives

    1. Identify the various functions represented on a project.
    2. Analyze and evaluate the influence of organizational structure on project functions.
    3. Design a project organizational chart for various project complexity profiles.

There is no single organizational approach to projects. Each project is organized to accomplish the work effectively and efficiently.
Several factors influence the organizational approach to execute a project. The complexity profile of a project, the culture of the
parent organization, the preferences of the project manager, the knowledge and skills of the team, and a parent organization with a
project management office are examples of factors that influence the project's organization.

In developing the project organizational structure, the project manager considers the span of control for each manager. The span of
control represents the number of people reporting to a manager. For example, the project manager does not want all the engineers
on a project reporting to the engineering manager and assigns senior engineers to report to the engineering manager with other
engineers reporting to the senior engineers.

The engineering manager can organize the engineering reporting structure so that the various engineering discipline managers
would report to him or her. For example, the structural, electrical, and mechanical engineering team leaders would report to the
engineer manager. On a larger, more complex project, the engineer manager may establish area team leaders and have the
structural, electrical, and mechanical engineers report to an area team leader. If the project is geographically dispersed, with the
engineering office staff in different cities working on the project, then structuring the engineering function by area provides better
coordination and control (see Figure ).

                                          Figure : Decreasing Span of Control by Increasing Levels of Reporting

The organization on the left has seventy-one engineers reporting to the same person. The organization on the right creates two
additional positions and reduces the span of control to thirty-seven and thirty-four, respectively.

Most projects have similar functions that are important to successfully managing the project. Included among these are the
following:

3.2.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24671
SPproojnescot rmanager
Controls
Procurement
Technical management
Quality
Administration

                                                               Figure : Typical Project Organization

On smaller projects, more than one function can be managed by one person. On larger projects, large teams may be needed to
accomplish the work within the function.

Project Sponsor

The project sponsor is outside the day-to-day operations of the project and has the organizational authority to provide resources and
overcome barriers for the project. The project sponsor is typically a leader in the parent organization with an interest in the outcome
of the project. As a leader in the parent organization, the project sponsor can provide input into the project scope and other
documents that define project success. The guidance and support from the project sponsor enhances the ability of the project to
successfully meet the parent organization's objectives.

  Southern Training Center Organization

  A training organization in South Carolina assigned a project sponsor to every project. For smaller projects, the regional
  manager fulfilled the role of project sponsor. On larger, more complex projects, the operations manager was the project
  sponsor. The vice president was the project sponsor of the three or four most complex projects, and the president was the
  project sponsor only on projects with a high degree of political risk. This approach to assigning project sponsors assured that
  each project had an organizational advocate that could address barriers and provide direction and resources. The project
  sponsor, in this organization, developed a relationship with a senior representative of the client organization, reviewed monthly
  reports, and conducted thorough quarterly reviews.

                        3.2.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24671
Project Manager

Project managers often have the breadth of responsibility associated with corporate chief executive officers (CEOs). The project
manager facilitates the start-up of a project and develops the staff, resources, and work processes to accomplish the work of the
project. He or she manages the project effectively and efficiently and oversees the closeout phase. Some projects are larger than
major divisions of some organizations, with the project manager responsible for a larger budget and managing more risk than most
of the organizational leaders. A mining company that builds a new mine in South Africa, an automobile manufacturer that creates a
new truck design, and a pharmaceutical company that moves a new drug from testing to production are examples of projects that
may consume more resources in a given year than any of the organization's operating divisions.

The function of the project manager can vary depending on the complexity profile and the organizational structure. Defining and
managing client expectations and start-up activities, developing the scope, and managing change are functions of the project
manager. On some projects, the project manager may provide direction to the technical team on the project. On other projects, the
technical leadership might come from the technical division of the parent organization.

Although the functional responsibilities of the project manager may vary, the primary role is consistent on every project. The
primary role of the project manager is to lead, to provide a vision of success, to connect everyone involved in the project to that
vision, and to provide the means and methods to achieve success. The project manager creates a goal-directed and time-focused
project culture. The project manager provides leadership.

Project Control

In general, project controls is both the planning function and the function that tracks progress against the plan. Project control
provides critical information to all the other functions of the project and works closely with the project manager to evaluate the cost
and scheduling impact of various options during the life of a project.

Sometimes accounting functions such as payroll, budgeting, and cash management are included within project controls. On larger
projects, accounting functions are typically separate because the accounting culture tracks expenses to the nearest penny, and cost
estimating and tracking by project controls can often be off by hundreds and sometimes thousands of dollars. The lack of definitive
information necessitates the development of cost estimates within ranges that are often inconsistent with accounting practices.
Separating these two functions allows each to operate within their own accuracy comfort zone. The following are typical activities
included within the project controls function:

    Estimating
    Tracking costs
    Analyzing trends and making projections
    Planning and scheduling
    Managing change
    Tracking progress against schedule

The project controls team gathers this information from all the functions on the project and develops reports that enable each
functional manager to understand the project plan and progress against the plan at both the project level and the functional level.
On large complex projects, some project managers will assign project controls professionals to work within the major functions as
well as the project management office. This approach allows each function to plan and track the function's work in more detail. The
project controls manager then coordinates activities across functions.

Project Procurement

The approach to purchasing the supplies and equipment needed by the project is related to the complexity profile of the project. A
small project with a low complexity level may be able to use the procurement services of the parent organization. In an
organization where project resources reside in various departments, the departments may provide the supplies and equipment each
team member of the project may need.

3.2.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24671
  Southern College Procurement Organization

  A college in South Carolina chartered a number of projects to increase the energy efficiency of the college. The project team
  included members from various college departments. Each department paid for the time, travel expenses, and supplies needed
  by the team member from their department. Each team member continued to use the computers and administrative support in
  their department for project work. The costs for this support was not included in the project budget nor tracked as a project
  expense. Equipment purchased by the project that was installed to reduce the energy consumption of the college was purchased
  through the college procurement department and charged to the project.

More complex projects with greater procurement activity may have a procurement person assigned to the project. This same South
Carolina college retrofitted a warehouse to create a new training center for industry. A procurement person was assigned to the
project to manage the contract with the construction firm remodeling the space, the purchase and installation of the new training
equipment, and the purchase of the supplies needed by the project team. All the procurement activity was charged to the project.
The procurement person reported to the project manager for better communication on what the project needed and when it needed
it. The procurement person participated as a member of the project team to understand and provide input into the costs and
scheduling decisions. The procurement person reported to the college procurement manager for developing and implementing
project procurement processes that met college procurement policies and procedures.

                                                                                 Figure :
On larger, more complex projects, the procurement team has several responsibilities. The team is responsible for procuring the
supplies and equipment (such as office supplies and computers) needed for the project team and the supplies and equipment (such
as the training equipment) needed to execute the project. On a typical construction project, the procurement team would rent a
construction trailer, office supplies, and computers for the project team to establish a construction office at the construction site.
The procurement team would also purchase the concrete, rebar, steel, and other material needed to construct the building.

  Procurement for Mining Project in South America

  On the large mining project in South America, during the initiation phase of the project, the procurement department arranged
  for office space and supplies for the engineering teams in Canada, Chile, and Argentina and construction offices at the
  construction site in Argentina. As the design and engineering progressed, the procurement team managed bids for the major
  equipment and bids for the preparation of the construction site. The procurement team managed the logistics associated with
  transporting large equipment from Europe, North America, and Asia to the job site in rural Argentina. After the completion of
  the project, the procurement team managed the deposal of project property.

On large, complex projects, the procurement team manages at least three types of relationships with companies doing business with
the project.

Commodity Procurement

The largest number of purchased items for most projects are commodity items. Commodities are items that can be bought off the
shelf with no special modification for the project. These items are typically bid and the lowest prices that can meet the schedule of
the project will win the contract. The procurement team assures the company that wins the bid can perform to the contact
specifications and then monitors the progress of the company in meeting the projects requirements. Concrete for the project and the

3.2.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24671
cranes leased to the project are examples of commodities. The key to success in managing commodity suppliers is the process for
developing the bids and evaluating and awarding the contracts.

Procurement from Vendors

The second type of relationship is the vendor relationship. The terms supplier and vendor are often used interchangeably. In this
text, suppliers provide commodities, and vendors provide custom services or goods. Suppliers bid on specialized equipment for the
project. Engineers will specify the performance requirements of the equipment, and suppliers that have equipment that meets the
requirements will bid on the project. The engineering team will assist in the evaluation of the bids to assure compliance with
specifications. The lowest bid may not win the contract. Sometimes the long-term maintenance costs and reliability of the
equipment may indicate a high price for the equipment. The key to success is the development of clear performance specifications,
good communication with potential bidders to allow bidders to develop innovative concepts for meeting the performance
requirements, and a bidding process that focuses on the goals of the project.

Partnerships

The third type of project procurement relationship is the partnership. Sometimes the partnership is legally defined as a partnership,
and sometimes the success of each partner is so closely tied together that the relationship operates as a partnership. On the South
American project, the project team partnered with an Argentinean construction company to access the local construction practices
and relationship with local vendors. This was a legal partnership with shared profits. The partner also designed and procured some
large mining equipment on which the success of the project and the company building the mining equipment depended. With this
type of relationship, a senior manager on the project is assigned to coordinate activities with the partner, and processes are put in
place to develop shared goals, align work processes, and manage change.

                                                          Figure : Procurement Manager Relationships

Technical Management

The technical management on the project is the management of the technology inherent in the project--not the technology used by
the team to manage the project. The technical complexity on a project can vary significantly. The technological challenges required
to build a bridge to span a five-hundred-meter canyon are significantly different from those required to span a five-thousand-meter
body of water. The technological complexity of the project will influence the organizational approach to the project. The
technological complexity for a project reflects two aspects: the newness of the technology and the team's familiarity with the
technology. The newness refers to the degree to which the technology has been accepted in the industry. The more accepted the
technology is in the industry usually means that more knowledge and experience will be available to the team. Familiarity refers to
the experience the project team has with the technology. The less familiarity the team has with the technology, the more energy and

3.2.5  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24671
resources the team will expend on managing the technological aspect of the project. For projects with high levels of project
technology, a specialist may be hired to advise the technology manager.

  Indiana Steel Company

  A steel company in Indiana purchased a new coal injection technology that would improve the quality of steel, reduce the cost
  to produce the steel, and reduce air and water pollution. The contract to design and construct the new plant was awarded to an
  engineering and construction company. No one on the engineering and construction team had experience with the coal
  injection technology. The client's team understood the technology and provided guidance to both the project engineering and
  construction teams. The client owned the coal injection technology, and the engineering and construction team brought the
  project management technology.

Project Quality

Project quality is often part of the technical manager's responsibility. On large projects or projects with a high degree of technical
complexity, the quality is sometimes a separate function reporting to the project manager. The project quality manager focuses on
the quality of the project work processes and not the quality of the client's product. For example, if the project is to design and
construct an automobile factory, the quality manager focuses on the project work processes and meeting the technical specification
of the equipment installed by the project team. The project quality manager is not responsible for the quality of the car the plant
produces. If the plant functions to the defined project specifications, the quality of the plant output is the responsibility of the plant
quality department, and it may take several months for the plant to refine the work processes to meet the design specifications of
the car.

On a construction project, the quality manager may test steel welders to assure the welders have the skills and that the welds meet
project specifications. On a training project, the quality manager may review the training curriculum and the qualification of the
instructors to assure the training provides the knowledge and skills specified by the client. On a drug development project, the
quality manager may develop processes to assure the water and other raw material meet specifications and every process in the
development process is properly documented.

Project Administration

The administrative function provides project specific support such as the following:

In most organizations, support for these functions is provided by the parent organization. For example, people assigned to the
project will get human resources (HR) support from the HR department of the parent organization. Salary, benefits, and HR
policies for employees assigned to the project will be supported out of the HR department. The parent organization will provide
accounting functions such as determining the cost of cash, taxes, year-end project reports, and property disposal at the end of the
project.

The project manager on smaller, less complex projects will have sufficient knowledge about these issues to coordinate with the
parent organization's functional leaders. On more complex projects, the project may have an administrative manager responsible
for coordinating the administrative functions of the projects. On larger, more complex projects, an administrative function may be
established as part of the project team, with many of the functions assigning a resource to the project. In all cases, the
administrative function on a project is closely related to the legal and organizational responsibilities of the parent organization and
close coordination is important.

  South American Mining Project

  The South American mine project has major design work to accomplish in three different design offices: Vancouver, Santiago,
  and Argentina. The project manager and the leadership team reside in Santiago, Chile. During the design stage of the project,
  the engineering manager in each engineering office is leading the work with project controls, procurement, and administration,
  each assigning resources to support the engineering activities at each location. The project engineer manager assigned the
  engineering work based on the capabilities of the office and coordinates the work between offices. The procurement, project
  controls, and administrative leaders assign resources to support the work in each office. For example, the project controls

3.2.6  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24671
  manager assigned a planner in each office to support the engineering manager in that office to develop and track the schedule.
  The project planner in Vancouver supports the development of the engineering schedule in Vancouver and communicates and
  coordinates with the planning activities in the other locations

    Accounting services
    Legal services
    Property management
    Human resources (HR) management
    Other support functions found in most organizations

When the project construction activities started, project controls, procurement, and administrative resources moved from
supporting engineering to supporting the construction activity. The project organizational structure changed as the engineering
manager and the engineering effort changed from primarily designing the project to supporting the construction effort, by
answering construction questions and developing solutions to construction challenges. The procurement effort changes from
managing the bidding and contracting activities to managing the logistics.

                                                      Figure : Organization for Major International Project

Key Takeaways

    Key functions on a project include sponsor, project manager, controls, procurement, technical, quality, and administration.
    The project sponsor has the organizational authority to provide guidance and resources and can overcome barriers for the
    project.
    The project manager is the project leader with broad responsibilities for all phases of the project and for meeting project goals
    and client expectations.
    The project controls manager is responsible for controlling the project processes, including cost estimating and tracking,
    developing schedules, tracking progress against schedules, managing changes to the schedule or budget, and analyzing trends.
    The procurement manager is responsible for obtaining the services and materials needed to complete the project. This is
    accomplished by purchasing commodities, managing contractors who provide services and products, and working with partners.
    The technical manager deals with the issues related to the technology of the project.
    The quality manager monitors the project's processes--not the quality of the product of the project--and takes steps to assure
    they are done correctly and meet specifications.
    Project administration manages accounting, legal, property, and human resources.

3.2.7  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24671
Exercises

Project Organization

    Key functions on a project include sponsor, project manager, controls, procurement, technical, quality, and administration.
    The project sponsor has the organizational authority to provide guidance and resources and can overcome barriers for the
    project.
    The project manager is the project leader with broad responsibilities for all phases of the project and for meeting project goals
    and client expectations.
    The project controls manager is responsible for controlling the project processes, including cost estimating and tracking,
    developing schedules, tracking progress against schedules, managing changes to the schedule or budget, and analyzing trends.
    The procurement manager is responsible for obtaining the services and materials needed to complete the project. This is
    accomplished by purchasing commodities, managing contractors who provide services and products, and working with partners.
    The technical manager deals with the issues related to the technology of the project.
    The quality manager monitors the project's processes--not the quality of the product of the project--and takes steps to assure
    they are done correctly and meet specifications.
    Project administration manages accounting, legal, property, and human resources.

 1. Materials or services whose quality is standardized and that are usually purchased based on lowest price are __________.
 2. Major components of a project that are specialized and that require the provider to help with solving problems and share in the

    profits are provided by ____________
 3. Worker benefits would be managed by the ________ function.
 4. Tracking costs and comparing them to the project budget is handled by the ___________ function.
 5. Buying concrete for a bridge project would be handled by the __________ function.
 6. Checking to see that the work performed on the project is done consistently and up to specifications is managed by the

    ________ function.
 7. The number of people who report to a manager is referred to as the _____ __ ______ (three words).
 8. If employees are responsible for estimating costs, to whom would they report?
 9. Refer to Figure 3.1 "Decreasing Span of Control by Increasing Levels of Reporting". How many additional employees were

    added to decrease the span of control of the engineering manager, and how was this accomplished?
10. Refer to Figure 3.4 "Procurement Manager Relationships". How do partnerships affect the complexity of the project? Describe

    an example of a situation where the partnership could affect the complexity of the project.
11. How is procurement from suppliers different from buying commodities?
12. Refer to Figure 3.3. To whom does the procurement manager report? Provide an example of a situation where this reporting

    relationship might increase the complexity of the project.

    Refer to the descriptions of the project functions and determine which manager would take care of each of the following
    problems. If you think the problem requires the attention of more than one function, explain why.

     1. One of the project team members has filed a sexual harassment suit against another team member of equal rank.
        ___________

     2. A contractor is installing equipment that is substandard. ___________
     3. The computer software used to make a step improvement in the client's operations has a significant bug in it. ___________
     4. The client wants to use higher-quality materials in the project than was originally agreed on. ___________
     5. Your organization has announced budget cuts but you cannot afford to lose anyone at this crucial stage in the project.

        ___________
     6. A contractor has complained that the procurement manager has a conflict of interest with a competing contractor.

        ___________

This page titled 3.2: Project Organization is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

3.2.8  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24671
3.3: Using the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index to Measure Organizational
Complexity

  Learning Objectives

    1. Analyze a project function for size, organizational complexity, technological newness, and technological familiarity and
       assign a complexity score.

Recall that the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index (DPCITM) ranks complexity in four categories: external, internal, technological,
and environmental. The information provided in this chapter can be used to rate a project's complexity in the areas of size,
organizational complexity, technological newness, and technology familiarity. Scores range from 1 (least complex) to 5 (most
complex).

Size

Recall that size is relative to the organization's comfort zone for projects. Refer to the following descriptions for tips on arriving at
a DPCI score for size:

 1. The project size is the most common size the organization does. The project manager and team members have done many
    similarly sized projects, and the tools they use to manage this size project are well tested and reliable.

 2. The project size is at the high or low end of the range of project sizes that the organization or team members have done before.
 3. The project size is about 20 percent higher or lower than projects the organization or some of the team members have done

    before. The project leader and a few key team leaders are familiar with this size project from work they have done elsewhere.
    Project management tools and processes will have to be adjusted but will probably work.
 4. The project size is about 50 percent higher or lower than projects the organization or most of the team members have done
    before. Project management tools and processes will have to be adjusted, and it is not certain that they will work well. New
    tools and procedures may be needed.
 5. Neither the organization nor the team members are experienced working on a project this size. It is several times larger or
    smaller than previous projects. It is too small or too large for the tools and techniques with which the team is familiar.

Organizational Complexity

Recall that system complexity is determined by the variety of types of elements and the number of connections there are between
elements. Review a chart of the organizational structure that depicts the reporting relationships, the number of people involved,
their familiarity with each other, and the amount of cross connections between reporting relationships and functions. Refer to the
following descriptions for tips on arriving at a DPCI score for size:

 1. The organizational structure is simple and involves few people. No new relationships need to be formed, and the people have
    worked together in these relationships before.

 2. The team includes people who report to operations managers instead of the project manager, and more people are involved.
 3. The organization chart has numerous segments, but most people are familiar with their roles and have worked in this type of

    role before.
 4. The number of people involved is large, and the functions are handled by many different people. There are several levels of

    reporting in the organization chart.
 5. The number of people is very large, and many of them do not know each other or have never met. Each major function requires

    a full-time person, and coordinating between functions requires frequent meetings among mid- and top-level managers.

Technology Newness

Recall that this category refers to the technology that is part of the project. It might be new technology that is being implemented to
make a step change in the efficiency of an operation. Refer to the following descriptions for tips on arriving at a DPCI score for
size:

 1. The technology is not new. It has been around for years and is reliable.

3.3.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24672
 2. The technology is only a few years old. Most of the initial bugs are out of it, but the fixes have not been thoroughly tested.
 3. The technology is recent, and only a few other organizations have experience with it. The providers promise that the next

    release or version will have the problems resolved.
 4. The technology is new and has just been released for general use. Problems are likely.
 5. The technology is in an early testing phase, and your organization is one of the test sites. Problems are expected.

Technology Familiarity

Recall that this category refers to the familiarity of the project team with the technology that is part of the project. Refer to the
following descriptions for tips on arriving at a DPCI score for size:

 1. The team members have all used the technology or have been involved with projects that used this technology. They are
    confident that they understand it and can handle problems related to it.

 2. The technology is new to some of the team members who are not in key positions. Standardized training is available, if
    necessary, to teach them what they need to know about it to do their jobs.

 3. Several team members have not worked with this technology, including some of the key team members. Standardized training is
    not available, and consultants might be needed.

 4. The technology is new but is similar to previous technologies with which the team leaders are familiar. An advisor from the
    product's development team may serve as a technology advisor.

 5. The technology is new, and no one has worked with it before. A specialist might be needed to avoid serious errors.

Tips for Assigning a Score

Assigning a score is not an absolutely accurate process. Your objective is to be approximately correct, and some people are not
comfortable with this type of estimate. Recall that one of the attributes of a successful project manager is the ability to live with
ambiguity. One method that will help when assigning a score is to consider the two extremes. For each factor in the DPCI, consider
what the simplest--least complex--scenario would look like, which would be a 1 on the DPCI scale. Next consider what the most
complex scenario would be, which would describe a 5. Then, compare actual projects to those two extremes. If it is close to, but not
as simple as, the least complex, you would give it a 2. If it is close to, but not as complex as, the most complex scenario you would
give it a 4. If it is about in the middle, it rates a 3.

Key Takeaway
    Scores range from 1 to 5, where 1 is the lowest level of complexity and 5 is the highest. In each situation, consider what the two
    extremes would look like and then judge where the current situation lies between those extremes.

Exercises

 1. If a project is about 20 percent larger or smaller than projects previously done by most of the team members, it should be rated
    as a ____ for size complexity.

 2. If the organizational structure is simple and involves few people and no new relationships need to be formed, the project rating
    for organizational complexity should be a ___.

 3. If the technology is in an early testing phase, your organization is one of the test sites, and problems are expected, the
    technology newness complexity rating should be a ______.

 4. If the technology is new to some of the team members who are not in key positions, but standardized training is available to
    teach them what they need to know about it to do their jobs, the technology familiarity complexity rating should be a ____.

 5. Why does the newness of a project's technology increase its complexity?
 6. The project controls manager decides to change the software his team uses to track project activities from Microsoft Project to

    Primavera. Few of the staff in that department are familiar with Primavera. How would this change affect the project technology
    complexity index score? Explain your answer.

Techniques for Assigning Scores

Refer to the tips for assigning scores to answer the following questions:

 1. How does the ability to live with ambiguity relate to assigning scores using the DPCI? ___________
 2. How does considering extremes help to assign a score? ___________

3.3.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24672
Choosing a Complexity Score

Consider a project that involves the merger of computer systems of two banks. The acquiring bank wants to convert the other
bank's computer system to its own software, and the project is to convert all the client account files. The software used by the
acquiring bank is relatively new, and only about a third of the project team is familiar with it. Your task is to determine a DPCI
rating for the familiarity of the project team with the technology.

 1. Describe a scenario that would qualify for a rating of 1.
 2. Describe a scenario that would qualify for a rating of 5.
 3. Indicate the rating you would choose and explain your choice.

This page titled 3.3: Using the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index to Measure Organizational Complexity is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license
and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

3.3.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24672
3.4: Exercises

Exercises at the end of the chapter are designed to strengthen your understanding and retention of the information recently acquired
in the chapter.

Essay Questions

Write several paragraphs to provide more in-depth analysis and consideration when answering the following questions.

 1. In June 2009, the CEO of Fiat took on the management of Chrysler and began a project with the objective of joining the two
    companies. He chose to "flatten" the management organization by increasing the number of people who report to him from a
    "handful" to twenty-three. Video conferences between the Chrysler and Fiat management teams take place from a conference
    room in Chrysler headquarters in Michigan where there are twenty-three seats and microphones for the Chrysler team members
    (Boudette, 2009). What do you think are the pros and cons of changing the CEO's span of control in this manner? Will this
    increase or decrease the complexity of the organization? Your answer should display an understanding of span of control and
    organizational complexity.

 2. The DPCITM and the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI): The human personality is more complex than a project; an
    evaluation system developed by Isabel Myers-Briggs based on the work of psychologist Carl Jung attempts to provide a simple
    profile based on four ranges of personality traits: introverted versus extroverted, intuitive versus sensing, thinking versus
    feeling, and judging versus perceiving. How does the Myers-Briggs profile compare and contrast with using the DPCI to
    determine the strengths and challenges of a project?

Discussion

The exercises in this section are designed to promote an exchange of information among students in the classroom or in an online
discussion. The exercises are more open ended, which means that what you find might be completely different from what your
classmates find, and you can all benefit by sharing what you have learned.

 1. Controls and procurement. Under what circumstances would the responsibilities of the controls manager and the procurement
    manager overlap? Describe the situation. Your description should indicate an understanding of the roles and duties of each
    manager. Consider the examples provided by your classmates and compare them with your example to determine if you
    correctly understand these two roles.

 2. Describe the four phases of a project in your own words. Pick a project that would have a score of 1 on the Darnall-Preston
    Complexity Index in the areas of size, organizational complexity, technology newness, and technology familiarity. Consider the
    examples provided by your classmates and compare them with your example to determine if you correctly understand how to
    score a project's complexity in these areas.

References

Boudette, N. E., "Fiat CEO Sets New Tone at Chrysler," Wall Street Journal, June 19, 2009,
online.wsj.com/article/SB124537403628329989.html (accessed June 21, 2009).

This page titled 3.4: Exercises is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

3.4.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24673
3.5: Web Exercise

  Learning Objectives
    1. Locate, download, and analyze project templates.

Use Templates to Standardize Project Development

Many organizations standardize their project development process using templates. The use of templates makes it easier to compare
projects and to assure that all the requirements are met. In this exercise, you locate and download a template for creating a scope
statement and its completion instructions. The template is used by the State of Virginia. This template and its instructions for
completion provide an overview of the structure of a project because the main parts of a project are clearly identified.

How to Download a Project Template and Its Instructions for Completion

 1. Start a web browser program and go to the Office of Enterprise Technology for the State of Virginia at
    www.vita.virginia.gov/oversight/projects/default.aspx?id=567. A list of templates displays, as shown in Figure 3.6 "State of
    Virginia Project Management Templates".

 2. Under Project Initiation, in the Project Charter row, in the Instructions column, click the Word icon. Save the file to your
    computer. Notice the folder in which you choose to save the file so you can find it again later.

 3. Open the file. Scroll down to page 2 and display section E, steps 1 through 3, as shown in Figure 3.7 "Description of the Project
    and Its Scope, Milestones, and Deliverables".

 4. Read each of the three items. Capture this screen to the computer's memory.
 5. Start a word processing program and open a new document. On the first line, type your name. Below your name, paste the

    screen capture.
 6. Save that document as Ch03ScopeStudentName in the .doc format used by Microsoft Word 2003.
 7. Return to the Scope Statement Development Instructions document. Scroll to item F and then read the instructions for

    describing the project authority.
 8. Capture this screen to the computer's memory. Switch to Ch03ScopeStudentName.doc and paste the screen below the first

    screen capture image.
 9. Return to the Scope Statement Development Instructions document. Scroll to item G and then read the instructions for

    describing the project organization.
10. Capture this screen to the computer's memory. Switch to Ch03ScopeStudentName.doc and paste the screen.
11. Switch to the web browser program. On the Project Charter row, in the Word Template column, click the Word icon. Save this

    document to the same folder as the instructions. Open this document.
12. In the Scope Statement Template, scroll through all eleven pages to review the elements of the project.
13. Scroll to the top of page 7. In section F, below item 2, enter your name as the project manager. Capture this screen to the

    computer's memory. Switch to Ch03ScopeStudentName.doc and paste the screen below the other screen images.
14. Review your work and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

Element                        Best                            Adequate       Poor

File name                      Ch03ScopeStudentName.doc Word 2010 version using .docx Another file name

Locate, download, and analyze  Name on first line followed by   Same as Best  Some screens missing or name
project templates              screen captures of sections E,                 not shown as the project
                               F, and G of the instructions                   manager in the template
                               and page 7 of the template
                               with your name as the project
                               manager

15. Save Ch03ScopeStudentName.doc and submit it as directed by the instructor. Close all documents and programs.

                                                         3.5.1                https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24674
This page titled 3.5: Web Exercise is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

3.5.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24674
CHAPTER OVERVIEW

4: Understanding and Meeting                  Client  Expectations

  4.1: Including the Client
  4.2: Understanding Values and Expectations
  4.3: Dealing with Problems
  4.4: Nurturing a Feeling of Satisfaction
  4.5: Exercises
  4.6: Web Exercises

This page titled 4: Understanding and Meeting Client Expectations is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                                      1
4.1: Including the Client

  Learning Objectives

    1. Describe what the client needs to know about changes in management style during different phases of a project.
    2. Identify advantages and disadvantages of including the client on project teams.

To appreciate the skill and effort expended by the project team in achieving the objectives of the project, the client needs to know
more about what the team does.

Educate the Client from the Beginning

Often the client does not have the project management experience of the project manager or project team. An experienced project
manager understands the phases of the project and the requirements of the different phases. A less experienced client may become
frustrated at the changes in the management approach required for the different phases of the project. For example, during the early
phases, the project leadership is encouraging creative approaches to accomplishing the project goals. As the project proceeds and
the project plan becomes more firm, the project leadership focuses on accomplishing the project goals. The types of meetings, the
agenda of the meetings, and the general project atmosphere change as the project moves from the planning phase to the production
mode of the execution phase of the project.

During the last phases on a project, project team members are often tired and beginning to anticipate the transition that will take
place at the end of the project. The motivational approach that worked during the early phases of the project is less effective during
the final phases, and the project manager applies different approaches to motivating the project team. These changes can be
disconcerting on a person's first project. By explaining what to expect and planning with the client a process to minimize the
impact of these changes, the project manager prepares the client for these events and reduces the frustration.

Include the Client on Selected Project Teams

The project client translates the needs of the organization through chartering the project and defining the project scope to the
project manager and the project team. The client also has an oversight role. This oversight is often accomplished through regular
project reviews and reports from the project team. Depending on the complexity level of the project, the reviews can vary
significantly. On less complex projects, the review might be conducted in a one-hour meeting with a one-page summary document
serving as the project progress report. On more complex projects, a full-day meeting might be necessary for the project progress to
be fully understood, and the project report may be one hundred pages or more.

In addition to providing the formal overview of the project, most clients would like to actively participate in the success of the
project. This is a delicate balance. The participation of the client can have undue influence on project decisions. The advantage of
including the client in project activities is to gain the client's personal investment in the project plan, to create a better
understanding for the client of the problems the project encounters during the life of the project, and to gain the insights and
contributions of the client in problem solving.

Involving the client in teams where the client's special knowledge can add value to the team discussions and activities contributes
both to the success of the team and the satisfaction of the client. During the construction of a chemical plant in Tennessee, the
project team struggled with a very tight project schedule. A team was established to explore ways to reduce the approval process for
the drawings of the plant design. It was taking two weeks for the design review, and even though this was within the normal time
frame for design reviews, the project management team believed there were opportunities to reduce this time and shorten the length
of the project.

The client's engineering manager participated in the brainstorming sessions that explored ways to reduce the design review time.
Several good ideas were developed and put into place. The client's engineering manager took these ideas back to the client's team
and instituted many of the same ideas. The result was a shortened schedule that saved two weeks by the end of the plant design.
The other result was a client that contributed to the project success and was emotionally engaged in the positive outcomes.

4.1.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24675
Key Takeaways
    The project manager's style changes with each phase of the project. The client could be surprised when the style changes from
    one that is open to any new idea in the initiation phase to a more task-oriented style during execution or a more demanding style
    during closeout.
    Client participation in project teams can have undue influence on decisions, but this is offset by the buy-in of the client and the
    insights the client can offer when special knowledge is needed or schedules need to be changed.

Exercises

 1. The client might be surprised when the project manager's style changes from inviting new ideas during the conceptual phase to
    discouraging them during the ________ phase.

 2. One problem with client participation in project teams is that a client can have ______ influence.
 3. What should the client know about the different management styles used in the initiation, execution, and closeout phases of the

    project?
 4. What is an advantage of having the client participate in some project teams?

Client Influence

Consider a project you have been involved in which the client took part in meetings and decision making. If you were to do the
project again, describe how you would manage the client's involvement. Specifically, describe the positive aspects that you would
repeat and the negative aspects that you would try to avoid.

This page titled 4.1: Including the Client is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

4.1.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24675
4.2: Understanding Values and Expectations

  Learning Objectives

    1. Identify methods for determining client expectations.
    2. Identify methods for clarifying values and determining differences.
    3. Describe the importance of dealing fairly with the client.

Two of the sources of dissatisfaction in personal and business interactions are unmet expectations and a misunderstanding or
ignorance of the values held by the other party. The project manager needs to avoid having a dissatisfied client due to a clash of
values or a failure to meet expectations.

Clarify Expectations

Client expectations are expressed in chartering documents such as the scope of work, the project purpose statement, and the list of
project deliverables. Other expectations exist that are more difficult to express in written documents.

  Managing Expectations

  One project client had such a difficult time with the billing processes on her previous project that significant project
  management time and resources were expended on reconciling billing issues. This client has an expectation in the next project
  that project accounting and billing processes operate effectively and efficiently. Another client had been constantly surprised by
  changes and nonplanned events happening on the project. This client wanted to participate early in the discussion of problems
  that arise during the life of the problem and contribute to finding solutions and minimizing the negative impact on project
  performance.

Understanding and capturing these expectations in a written document is an important step in effectively meeting client
expectations. Often it is the next question that enables a project manager to discover the less obvious expectations. The next
question is the one the project manager asks after the initial response to inquiries about expectations. In our example, the client may
express that he or she wants project billings to be accurate and timely. This is an easily understandable expectation, but when the
project manager asked the next question--"Can you tell me more about what you mean?"--the client revealed the problems on her
previous project, and the project team developed a better understanding of the client's concern. The project team developed
measures for tracking project billings that measured both timeliness and accuracy. This process enabled the project team to
understand the client's concern, develop work processes that demonstrated a response, and provide data to the client on the
timeliness and the accuracy of the billing processes.

For the client that expected to hear about problems early and participate in the problem-solving discussions, the project team shared
the project action item register and highlighted issues the team felt may be important to the client. The project manger also
discussed potential concerns with the client during their weekly project update.

After the project team captures the client expectations, the team then develops a method for tracking performance against
expectations. In our example, the project team defined accuracy and timeliness in measurable terms and tracked the team
performance. The project team developed a survey to track the client's perception of inclusion in the problem-solving process and
tracked the client's response. These measures were then presented in the project review meetings with other measures of project
performance such as cost and schedule.

As the project team meets and exceeds the client expectations, these expectations tend to change. If the goal is 85 percent accuracy
on all project billings, and the project team begins to perform with an average of 95 percent accuracy or higher and never falls
below 90 percent, then the client begins to expect 95 percent accuracy. This is a realistic expectation of the client; it also changes
the expectation so that meeting the client's expectation becomes harder. Even if expectations change, it is important to maintain the
original goal. This reminds the client at the end of the project that the project team not only met expectations but also raised them
during the life of the project.

4.2.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24676
Clarify Values

Values are desirable principles or qualities (Merriam-Webster Unabridged Online Dictionary, 2009). Disagreements based on
differences in values are extremely difficult to resolve because compromising means compromising your values. Organizations
often have developed a list of corporate values. Sometimes these are real and sometimes they are more important to the corporate
brand. The project manager needs to understand the real organizational and personal values related to the project.

On construction projects, safety is an important consideration in the planning and execution of a project. Every construction
company will assert a strong safety value. The value is tested when safety rules are developed. Is the organization willing to
terminate or sanction an employee for a major safety violation? This is not a yes or no question but the beginning of a dialogue.
Everyone on the project needs to understand safety rules, and consistent application of the approach to safety is critical to
establishing a safety culture on the project. Agreeing on a safety program based on a value for safety at the beginning of a project
will prevent serious confrontations later.

  Phone Etiquette

  A large project in Washington had a client that valued communications. All the members of the client's team had the newest
  phone technology and took calls during project meetings. The project team saw this behavior as rude and interfering with the
  effectiveness of the project. The client was very comfortable in this chaotic environment and saw constant communication as a
  value that helped the organization identify and respond to opportunities. This provided the organization with a competitive
  advantage in their marketplace. The same behavior was preventing the project team from developing a common understanding
  and agreeing on a project plan because they could not focus on the needs of the project long enough to develop this common
  understanding. The project manager and the lead client recognized the potential conflict for the project and developed a list of
  project meetings that would be "cell-less," which meant that the team members would turn cell phones off for that meeting.
  Other meetings would follow the cultural standards of the client.

Developing a mutual understanding of the personal and organizational values and dealing with differences during the early phases
of the project will significantly reduce the potential for insolvable conflicts. This becomes more important on a large, complex
project where the likelihood of a diverse project team is high, and the team may have to deal with different laws, customs, and
cultural values. Developing an understanding of these differences and developing an appreciation for the value of this diversity for
project team members can prevent conflict later in the project.

Deal Fairly with the Client

During the life of the project, the project manager will often have the opportunity to take advantage of the client, either because a
clause in the contract is not written accurately or because the project manager has access to more detailed information. For
example, a client finds a mistake in the original documents provided to the project team. The project team analyzes the new
information to access the potential impact on the project cost and schedule. A skilled project manager can demonstrate a negative
impact and increase project profits by requesting a change order. A skilled project manager can also usually find an innovative
approach to finding a solution without increasing the cost or schedule. In most cases, the client wants to be treated fairly. Fairness
is characterized by impartiality and honesty that is free from self-interest, prejudice, or favoritism (Merriam-Webster Unabridged
Online Dictionary, 2009). If the client interprets the change order as fair, then the project manager has the opportunity to create a
satisfied client. If the client believes the behavior of the project manager is unfair, then it is difficult to create a satisfied client.

Key Takeaways
    To identify client expectations, review written documents, but have a dialogue with the client to uncover unwritten expectations
    by asking questions and listening. Manage increasing expectations by reminding the client of the original objectives.
    Determine the stated corporate values by reviewing written documents and review actions related to those stated values to see
    which ones are the basis for action. Attempt to avoid conflicts of values by identifying the differences before they become
    problems.
    Do not take advantage of clients' mistakes, but help them meet their objectives in spite of their errors. Live your own values of
    fairness.

4.2.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24676
Exercises

 1. If a project is regularly exceeding the stated goal for quality, it is important to remind the client of the __________ objective.
 2. Values are desirable _______ or qualities.
 3. Treating a client fairly means avoiding _______, prejudice, or favoritism.
 4. What are some written sources of client expectations?
 5. What is an example of a corporate value?
 6. What does it mean to treat a client fairly?

Organizational Values

Choose an organization with which you are familiar that proclaims to support a particular set of values. Describe actions that it has
taken that either support or differ from its stated values.

References

Merriam-Webster Unabridged Online Dictionary, s.v. "values," unabridged.merriam-webster.com/cgi-bin/collegiate (accessed June
18, 2009).

This page titled 4.2: Understanding Values and Expectations is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

4.2.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24676
4.3: Dealing with Problems

  Learning Objectives

    1. Describe standards and procedures for dealing with problems.
    2. Describe the advantages of dealing with difficult issues as soon as they arise.
    3. Describe the importance of establishing methods for revising major decisions.

Projects always experience unexpected problems that produce stress. Dealing with problems with competence is vital to
maintaining a good relationship with clients.

Establish Standards and Procedures for Decisions

There are competing interests on projects, and the larger and more complex the project, the greater the number of issues and
concerns that need to be addressed.

 Competing Interests

 It's 7:30 in the morning and the client called and wants you to have coffee in an hour with the new CEO, who flew in last
 night, to give him an update on the project. The concrete trucks were supposed to be on site at 7:00, but they have not arrived.
 A storm is predicted for tomorrow, and the concrete has to be in and covered before the storm hits. A news reporter called and
 said she has an unnamed source who claims that there is contamination of a nearby river coming from the project site.

On large, complex projects, hundreds of decisions are made every day. Most of the decisions focus on the day-to-day operation of
the project. Early in the project, decisions focus on choosing between alternative options for accomplishing project goals and
determining how the project will be executed. Later, the focus is typically on solving problems. The project team develops
solutions to deal with the barriers that emerge and develops alternative plans to meet project goals. The authority to make decisions
is typically established early in the project and identified in a responsibility matrix--a table of people and types of problems that
might require decisions--as shown in Figure 4.5.

              Figure 4.5 The Responsibility Matrix The responsibility matrix identifies roles and client involvement.

Title Scope Statement Work Breakdown Change Budget Quality Management Change
                   Structure                                                                                           Approvals
                                                                                        Procedures

Project

Chartering    X

Committee

Client Representative X X X X X X

Project Manager X  X          X                                                         X                              X

Technology Team X X

Finance Team                  X                                                         X

Schedule

Coordination       X                    X                                               X

Team

Decisions that influence the outcome of the project, such as a delay to the project completion date or an increase in the project
costs, typically involve the client. Some clients prefer to make the final decision, with the project manager developing alternative

                                 4.3.1                                                     https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24677
solutions with a cost-benefit analysis of each of the alternatives. Others prefer to be involved in discussions to better understand the
barriers, developing alternative solutions and making decisions in a team environment. Understanding the client's decision-making
preference and developing procedures and processes that support that preference is important to meeting client expectations.

Develop processes and methods that encourage both client and team members to identify issues and concerns early. Develop
processes for dealing with these issues and concerns effectively. Define how and when decisions are made.

On projects with a low complexity level, the project manager and team leaders can make decisions informally, with short meetings
or phone calls. Weekly or monthly staff meetings are appropriate for more complex decisions. Even though the decision-making
process may be simpler on less complex projects, it is still important to understand the client's expectation for inclusion in the
decision-making process and recording decisions and changes in project plans.

On more complex projects, the use of action item registers, weekly staff meetings, responsibility matrices, and other tools foster the
decision making on a timely basis. For project teams operating in diverse locations, Internet-based tools for recording and tracking
action items can provide a location for capturing issues and concerns.

Deal with Difficult Issues Early

Project managers typically have a high degree of confidence in their ability to deal with issues and concerns as they arise. The
delivery of some equipment is delayed a week, causing changes in the project schedule, or the beta test of a software program
identified far more problems than expected. The project manager knows the problems, the team developed a solution, and the
project has a plan for recovering. The project will be back on track soon. Should the project manager inform the client? The answer
seems like an easy yes, yet many project managers often believe there is no reason to bother the client with a problem they have
under control.

Then the second delay occurs on the equipment delivery or the fixes for the beta test are more costly than expected. Now the
problems have elevated to the point the clients should be informed. The greater the distance between the time of the event and the
time the client knows about the events, the greater the client's frustration and mistrust. Including the client in the processes for
analyzing project issues or concerns as well as the recovery planning enables the client to develop confidence that problems are
being addressed. Including the client early in the process for dealing with problems enables the client to contribute with solutions
and builds confidence that he or she is aware of critical issues on the project.

  New Estimates Increase Cost Projections

  On a large, complex project in South America, the project team was reestimating the project cost and schedule projections after
  the project design was complete. The team was also conducting a new risk analysis, and the results of the cost and schedule
  projections, together with the risk analysis, provided the client with better cash flow projections. Early in the process, the
  project team understood that the cost projections would significantly increase, and the final project cost would be significantly
  above the contingency set aside for the project.

The client looked for an early indication of the results of the analysis, and the project manager kept reporting it was too early to
know. The project team debated how much contingency the project needed and how to inform the client. When the client was told
the results of the cost projections, the response was a combination of frustration and anger. The project manager was removed from
the project and a new project manager assigned.

The project manager should have dealt with the increased cost of the project early on. When first indications suggested that
estimates were low and several items in the budget needed extra funds, the project manager should have had conversations with the
client. Including one or more members of the client's team in the reevaluation effort would have kept the client informed of the
progress regularly and built trust in the new numbers. The project team could have offered suggestions and contributed to possible
solutions for addressing the concerns that were developing, as costs were higher than expected. Dealing openly and early with the
client is critical to client satisfaction.

4.3.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24677
Provide Mechanisms for Revisiting Major Decisions and Issues

The project environment moves fast, and decisions are made and implemented to keep pace. Decisions made in the conceptual
phase of the project seem less effective during the design phase. It is not that the decision was necessarily wrong; based on the data
at the time, most decisions are understandable. With new information, it is sometimes important to revisit and change decisions
made earlier in the project. As obvious as this sounds, many project teams are reluctant to challenge earlier decisions. Without a
mechanism in place to revisit decisions, decisions may be seen as final. This sense of finality may slow down the decision-making
process to make sure every decision is right. Delays in decisions can put activities behind schedule and affect the project
completing on time.

Mechanisms for revisiting decisions are similar to project change orders. Similar to a change order, a request to revisit a decision
must be initiated by someone on the team. The formality of methods used by the project to revisit a decision depends on the
complexity profile of the project. On less complex projects, an informal discussion in project meetings can develop the awareness
that a decision needs to be revisited. On more complex projects, the action item register and the weekly project meetings provide a
venue for revisiting decisions.

Sometimes people asked that decisions be revisited because they did not like the decision that was made.

  Revisiting Decisions

  On an engineering project, the electrical design schedule was changed to support the completion of the activities on the critical
  path by a project milestone date. The change increased the number of hours needed to complete the work because of the
  change in work processes. The project manager accepted the costs of the change to achieve the milestone date, but the manager
  of the electrical engineering team objected because the change would cause their part of the job to exceed the budgeted
  amount. The project manager decided not to revisit the decision because no new information was available that would cause
  the decision to change.

Clients are often involved in major decisions on the project. For example, if the project invested another million dollars, the project
could be completed a month early. The client will conduct the cost-benefit analysis and decide if the extra expense is worth the gain
in time. Once this decision is made, the necessary changes are made in the execution plan and new goals are established through
the change management process. Later, for reasons outside the control of the project, the project will not experience the time
savings from the additional investment of funds. It is important to revisit the decision. A culture that encourages project team
members to bring up the need for revisiting decisions and a mechanism that makes it easy to surface issues and concerns will
increase the likelihood that these issues will come to the attention of the management team.

  Vendor Decision Not Revisited

  On a major pharmaceutical project in Ireland, a United States-based company was building a new plant to produce a new drug,
  and the priority was completing the plant to get the drug to the marketplace. The client was involved in the process to select
  major equipment, and after an expedited bidding process, an equipment vendor was selected for a critical piece of the plant
  equipment. Later, members of the project team learned that this vendor was overcommitted, and there was a high risk that the
  vendor would not be able to meet the schedule dates. Because it was the client's decision, the project leadership was not
  warned of the possible risk. Weeks later, the vendor began missing critical dates, and the leadership became aware of the risks.

Establishing a culture and a mechanism for revisiting project decisions is important for meeting client expectations.

  Emergency Button

  An experienced project manager came up with a clever idea to enable his clients to capture the attention of the project team. He
  gave the client's team a bright red index card and said, "This is your emergency button." The card was a symbol. It empowered
  the client with the ability to capture the complete attention of the project team. When the client presented the red button, the
  project manager instantly stopped current activities and focused on the client. The red button meant the project leadership
  focused on understanding the issue or concern presented by the client and developing project priorities to meet the client's
  concerns.

4.3.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24677
  Although the red button was rarely used, it gave a sense of power to the client and communicated that the client was important.
  One project manager used the "red button" on four projects, and on two of the projects the card was never used. On one
  project, the client used the card to get the project ready for a visit from the client's boss, and on the fourth project, the client
  used the card often. Although the project manager believed the card was overused to get the total attention of the project
  leadership team, he never regretted providing the client with the card. The "red button" card provided them a method to
  distinguish the really important needs of the client.

Key Takeaways
    Determine who should be included in decisions for each category using a decision matrix
    Decide at what level of problem the client should be involved by discussing the threshold with the client. Involve the client
    early in the process to give them a chance to contribute to the solution before the problem gets worse.
    Decide what criteria to use to determine when a decision should be revisited. Additional information that is developed during
    the design and planning phase can require that decisions made during the conceptual phase need to be reconsidered.

Exercises

 1. A table that displays who should be included in making different types of decisions is a decision ______.
 2. A client should be involved in decisions ______ in the process of dealing with a problem.
 3. Information that is developed in the planning phase can require reconsidering decisions that were made in the _________ phase.
 4. Describe a responsibility matrix and how it is used.
 5. Why is it important to inform a client early in the process of resolving a problem?
 6. Why should earlier decisions be revisited?

Threshold for Client Involvement

    Consider a project with which you are familiar where the client was not included in making day-to-day decisions. Describe a
    type of problem that would be too small to take to the client for input and another problem that would be just large enough to
    require client involvement. If you were trying to communicate the reasons for your decision to another team member, describe
    the threshold that had to be crossed for the second problem to qualify for client involvement.

This page titled 4.3: Dealing with Problems is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

4.3.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24677
4.4: Nurturing a Feeling of Satisfaction

  Learning Objectives

    1. Describe the advantages of using project milestones.
    2. Describe the advantages of including the client in celebrations and guidelines for doing so.

Manage around Project Milestones

Project milestones represent significant events on the project. Some project milestones signify external events that provide critical
information or resources to the project or an external event that requires information or deliverables from the project.

  Board of Directors Meeting

  The client's board of directors meets on March 15, and the client must report the project progress and submit the project final
  budget for approval. The project team develops the information needed for the project progress report and finalizes the project
  estimate by March 10 to provide the client with five days to review the information and make any changes.

Recall that a milestone is an event that consumes no time or resources. In this example, the Provide Client with Report is the
milestone event. All the activity to develop and deliver the report takes place before the milestone event.

  Extra Effort to Meet a Milestone

  On March 8, the project team determines that the progress report and estimate cannot be completed by March 10. The team
  will need one more day to complete the report and estimate. Should the project manager ask the client for a one-day extension?
  The client may be able to review and revise the information before it goes to the board in four days, but the message to the
  client has a bigger impact on the project. By missing the deadline, the client can develop the perception that client deadlines
  are less important, that the project team is unable to complete critical tasks on time, or that the project team is not dedicated.

Making the extra effort to deliver by the milestone date communicates to the client and the project team the importance of meeting
milestones. The client develops confidence that the project team is dedicated to meeting client expectations and that deadlines are
important. The extra efforts by the team to meet the client's critical dates will often result in the client making an extra effort to
help the project team meet critical dates.

During the life of a project, the project team encounters a large number of small problems that can cause small delays. A
thunderstorm caused the loss of electricity in the office building, and the bidders' conference had to be delayed one day; a computer
virus shut down the use of computers, causing the loss of another day; and the airplane flights were late, so the project reviews
were one day late. None of these events caused significant problems for the project, but together they add up to delays that could
affect the end date of the project.

If these delays continue to add up, then the project end date will begin to slip. As the project nears the completion date, the team
will work overtime, decisions will be rushed, and resources will be added to the project to avoid missing the project end date. This
type of end-of-project atmosphere will leave a strong lasting impression with the client and usually does not produce a satisfied
client.

Project milestones provide the opportunity for the project manager to spread the end-of-project pressure over the life of the project.
Project managers add resources, authorize overtime, and expedite work to accomplish what is required to meet the milestone. The
project work increases in intensity, motivating project team members to accomplish the work on time until the milestone is
achieved. After the milestone is achieved, the project celebrates and acknowledges the success of the team and then begins working
toward the next milestone. Project managers use milestones to increase this intensity and focus to keep the project on schedule and
prevent the delays of hard decisions to the end of the project.

This approach allows the project manager to lower the intensity of the project after a milestone is accomplished. After celebrating
the successful completion of the milestone, a project manager will often review the future plans and allow the team to reflect on

4.4.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24678
finding new ways of approaching the project work. Adjustments are made to the project work plan and the milestone cycle begins
again.

Milestones are rarely evenly distributed over the length of the project. Project managers often select key events and make them
milestone events to create roughly equal spacing between milestone dates. On large, multiyear projects, managing to a milestone
each quarter provides good timing for the project. On shorter projects, monthly milestones can provide the right timing. On larger,
more complex projects, typically a large number of activities can be designated as milestones for the project. On smaller projects,
the project manger may need to artificially create milestones.

Include the Client in Celebrations

Project celebrations are a time when the project manager and the management team can thank the project team members for their
contribution to the project's success at various stages of the project. Celebrations for successfully accomplishing project milestones
are good examples of creating the opportunity to honestly celebrate. Some projects have birthday celebrations for the team or
holiday celebrations, and although these events can be a positive contribution to the project morale, they are not connected to the
success of the team in accomplishing project objectives.

Successful celebrations reinforce the effort and activities that created the success. Successful celebrations communicate
appreciation for the energy and commitment of the team, focused on team goals. Successful celebrations communicate progress
and confidence to project stakeholders, and successful celebrations share the success of the project with the client and reinforce the
meeting of client expectations.

Successful celebrations result from good planning and the application of some basic principles for celebrations. The following are
some of the basic principles for developing a successful celebration:

When clients speak at a celebration, their remarks usually provide high praise for the work of the project team. This event provides
an opportunity for the client to reflect and appraise the progress of the project team. Often the client concludes that the team is
meeting or exceeding expectations. The celebration reinforces that conclusion.

If the client has doubts about some of the project performance but still speaks at the celebration and praises the team, the client may
experience cognitive dissonance. The client will typically reevaluate the perception of the project team's performance and conclude
the team really has done a good job. The perception is now consistent with the client's remarks and the end result is a client
perception of a project as meeting expectations.

Understanding and meeting client expectations is a proactive process. The project manager and the project team develop plans and
processes that focus on defining both specifications and expectations that are often difficult to quantify. The team executes the
project in a way that meets both the specifications of the client and also the more subtle expectations not reflected in the measured
data.

Key Takeaways
    Making extra efforts to meet milestone dates keeps the project on track and avoids large problems at the end of the project. It
    allows for lessening of intensity after a milestone to provide stress relief for team members, and it builds confidence in the
    client that the project will be completed on time.
    If the client is included in milestone celebrations, he or she has a better understanding of what effort it takes to keep the project
    on track. If asked to say something at the celebration, the client will usually say positive things that have an effect on his or her
    perception of the project. Celebrations should communicate the importance of the milestone to the project and praise specific
    accomplishments. The celebration should occur in the workplace. Get high-ranking people to praise the project team in front of
    each other to reinforce a sense of satisfaction and include food in the celebration to make it more social.

Exercises

Milestone Celebrations

    What was accomplished and why it was important to the overall success of the project should be communicated to the team.
    Discuss the goals that were accomplished and the milestones met and how that advanced the project. For example, the civil
    design team on a construction project completed the site work design early, the bids for the site work were on the street early,

4.4.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24678
    and the project met the milestone of moving dirt on the site by May 1. Starting the site work early helps assure that the
    construction work will be under a roof before the bad weather hits in the late fall.
    Appreciation should be expressed specifically. A general statement that the project met all the goals does not carry the same
    meaning as "the project team completed the development of the new training curriculum by December 1." People associate
    their activities with meeting the milestone and take pride in their contribution to the project's success. Team members
    appreciate it when the project manager and others recognize their contribution.
    Celebrations should occur in the work area where the accomplishments were achieved. Celebrating holidays in the cafeteria is
    appropriate. Celebrating the accomplishments of the project in the project task force area brings a stronger association of the
    work of the project with the accomplishments being celebrated.
    Accomplishments of the team should be celebrated shortly after the milestone is achieved. The more time elapsed between the
    accomplishments and the celebrations, the less the impact.
    The persons that publicly recognize the team are important. The project leadership expressing personal appreciation reinforces
    the recognition of the work and effort to achieve project goals. Senior managers of the company reinforce the importance of the
    project to company goals and recognition of the role of individual project team members' contribution to company success.
    In many cultures, food is associated with times of reflection, such as the dinner table discussion or lunch meetings. Serving food
    communicates that this event is special. Serving food also communicates that someone took the time to prepare and serve the
    project team as a form of appreciation.
    Clients play a special role in celebrations, and celebrations play a special role in meeting client expectations. A client expression
    of appreciation to the project team is often more significant than the appreciation expressed by senior managers. Clients in most
    commercial organizations are acknowledged as the source of profits, bonuses, and future business. A client expressing
    appreciation to the project team, especially in front of the company's senior management, gives the project team special status
    for creating goodwill with clients.
    Making extra efforts to meet milestone dates keeps the project on track and avoids large problems at the end of the project. It
    allows for lessening of intensity after a milestone to provide stress relief for team members, and it builds confidence in the
    client that the project will be completed on time.
    If the client is included in milestone celebrations, he or she has a better understanding of what effort it takes to keep the project
    on track. If asked to say something at the celebration, the client will usually say positive things that have an effect on his or her
    perception of the project. Celebrations should communicate the importance of the milestone to the project and praise specific
    accomplishments. The celebration should occur in the workplace. Get high-ranking people to praise the project team in front of
    each other to reinforce a sense of satisfaction and include food in the celebration to make it more social.

 1. Managing a project using ___________ keeps the project on track and allows for periodic celebrations of achieving interim
    objectives.

 2. Clients should be encouraged to ___________ in celebration of project achievements.
 3. Why should extra effort be expended to meet a milestone when the final project's due date is months away?
 4. Why should the client be included in milestone celebrations?

    Consider a workplace with which you are familiar. If it utilizes milestone celebrations to mark completion of special tasks or
    phases of work, compare the components of the celebration with those recommended in the text. If it does not, describe how
    you would use milestone celebrations in this workplace.

This page titled 4.4: Nurturing a Feeling of Satisfaction is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

4.4.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24678
4.5: Exercises

Exercises at the end of the chapter are designed to strengthen your understanding and retention of the information recently acquired
in the chapter.

Essay Questions

Write several paragraphs to provide more in-depth analysis and consideration when answering the following questions.

 1. Describe a project with which you are familiar that resulted in a dissatisfied client. The project can be personal or professional if
    it serves to illustrate the concepts in this chapter. Identify how the client was included or excluded from project teams and how
    they were informed of problems. Analyze the situation and draw a conclusion regarding how a similar client might be satisfied
    on a future project.

 2. Describe a project with which you are familiar that resulted in a satisfied client. The project can be personal or professional if it
    serves to illustrate the concepts in this chapter. Identify how the client was included or excluded from project teams and how
    they were informed of problems. Analyze the situation and draw a conclusion regarding which aspect of client relations was
    most effective in achieving client satisfaction.

 3. Describe a project with which you are familiar where early decisions had to be changed based on information that became
    available later in the project. Analyze the process by which the decision was made and at what point the client was informed of
    the need for a change. Describe any changes you would make in the process or timing that might improve client satisfaction.

Discussion

The exercises in this section are designed to promote exchange of information among students in the classroom or in an online
discussion. The exercises are more open ended, which means that what you find might be completely different from what your
classmates find, and you can all benefit by sharing what you have learned.

 1. Milestone celebrations. Consider celebrations of milestone events in your life and how those celebrations affected your memory
    and attitudes toward achieving those objectives. Do you think using milestone celebrations can be a useful tool for projects?
    Express your opinion and support it with examples.

 2. Client participation. Where would you place the threshold for involving a client in a decision? What criteria would you use and
    how would you involve the client with that process of establishing the threshold?

This page titled 4.5: Exercises is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

4.5.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24679
4.6: Web Exercises

  Learning Objectives

    1. Locate and analyze information online related to managing client relationships.
    2. Locate, download, and analyze a project milestone analysis and then create your hypothetical project milestone analysis for

       distribution to your team and client.

Locate and Analyze Information Online Related to Managing Client Relationships

Managing relationships with clients is a challenging task, and it is often discussed online. In this exercise, you locate online articles
and other publications dealing with client relationships and then compare and analyze them.

How to Read about Client Relationships

 1. Start a web browser program and go to the an idea website at anidea.com/etc/how-to-create-a-cooperative-relationship-
    between-account-and-project-management.

 2. Review the five topics listed in this article.
 3. Start a word processing program and open a new document. On the first line, type your name. Below your name, write a brief

    summary of the points made in each of the five major topics.
 4. Save the word processing document as Ch04ClientStudentName using the Word 2003 .doc file format.
 5. In the web browser, use a search program such as Google to search for a combination of key terms such as Project Management

    Client Relationships.
 6. Review the results of the search and choose a site that addresses some of the same points. Consider the similarities and

    differences between this site and the article from an idea.
 7. Copy the web address from the browser's address bar.
 8. Switch to Ch04ClientStudentName. Paste the web address into the document.
 9. Switch to the browser. Capture the screen and paste it into Ch04ClientStudentName.
10. Below the screen image, compare the content of the two sites point by point using a separate paragraph for each point. Be

    specific. If the site does not address one of the five points in the first site, briefly mention that it does not.
11. Save the document.
12. Review your work and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

Element                        Best                          Adequate      Poor

File name                      Ch04ClientStudentName.doc Word 2010 version using .docx Another file name

Locate and analyze             Summary of the five points;   Same as Best  Summary not accurate; missing
information online related to  web address; screen capture;                web address or screen; all five
managing client relationships  comparison of each point                    topics not addressed

13. Save the file and submit it as directed by the instructor. Close all documents and programs.

Project Milestone Analysis[1]

Morale and psyche are an important component in any project; this includes both the team and the client. Project milestones
represent significant events within the project. Some project milestones signify external events that provide critical information or
resources to the project or an external event that requires information or deliverables from the project. Nonetheless, the proper
creation and distribution of this information can be an integral part of the overall success of your project.

How to Download a Project Milestone Analysis

 1. Open a blank word processing document and type Milestone and your name and date on the first line. Save the file as
    Ch04MilestonesStudentName using the Word 2003 file format that ends with .doc.

                                     4.6.1                                 https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24680
2. Start a web browser program and go to the Orion Crew Exploration Vehicle Project Milestones page for NASA at
   www.nasa.gov/pdf/479023main_Orion_2010_Milestones.pdf. A screen capture of this milestone analysis is shown in Figure 4.9
   "Orion Milestone--NASA".

                       Figure 4.9 Orion Milestone--NASA

NASA - public domain.

3. Add this website to your browser's favorites list, in a folder named Milestones.
4. Capture a screen that shows a link to this site in the Projects folder of your bookmarks or favorites and then paste it into the

   word processing document.
5. Within the PDF file locate the milestone attribute within the analysis that you feel to be most significant, capture the screen of

   that milestone accomplishment, and paste it in the Word document.
6. Below the Word document, include a brief summary (250 words) as to why you think this accomplishment is of merit and

   utilize references from the reading in Chapter 4 "Understanding and Meeting Client Expectations" to correlate this
   accomplishment to things you've learned in the text. Describe the advantages of using project milestones.

How to Create an Analysis

 1. Now that you have familiarized yourself with the reading on the importance of project milestones and witnessed a firsthand
    account of a project milestone analysis on behalf of NASA, create your hypothetical 1,000-word milestone analysis document
    including a minimum of four digital images. Make sure that the analysis is pertinent and consistent--maintain a common
    theme.

 2. Use appropriate verbiage that will be comprehendible by everyone who may read this analysis: team members, clients, and so
    on.

 3. Insert this 1,000-word analysis with imagery below the final screen capture from the NASA website.
 4. Review your work and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

                       4.6.2                             https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24680
Element                         Best                              Adequate                         Poor

File name                       Ch04MilestonesStudentName.        Ch04MilestonesStudentName        Another file name
                                doc

Locate, download, and analyze   Milestone and name/date on        Milestone and name on first      Missing or incomplete screen
a project milestone analysis    first line; screen captures that  line; screen captures that show  captures; a rebuttal that is too
and then create your            show the web link in the          the web link in the Milestone    general and lacks significant
hypothetical project milestone  Milestone folder of your          folder of your browser's         educational correlation from
analysis for your team and      browser's favorites and an        favorites and an image of the    the text; a hypothetical
client                          image of the initial screen       NASA milestone analysis; a       milestone analysis that is not
                                capture of the NASA               brief rebuttal (150 words or     consistent and lacks evidence
                                milestone analysis; your          less) as to why you think this   of thought provocation
                                perceived, most important         is the most important aspect of
                                aspect and rebuttal (250          the milestone; a hypothetical
                                words); a hypothetical 1,000-     500-word milestone analysis
                                word milestone analysis that is   that is somewhat consistent
                                entirely consistent

5. Save Ch04MilestoneStudentName and submit it as directed by the instructor. Close all documents and programs.

1. Written by Eric Ouellette as his additional project for graduate credit, December 2010, Eastern Michigan University. Edited by
   Professor Preston on June 20, 2012. 

This page titled 4.6: Web Exercises is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                      4.6.3                                                        https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24680
CHAPTER OVERVIEW

5: Working with People on             Projects

  5.1: Working with Individuals
  5.2: Working with Groups and Teams
  5.3: Creating a Project Culture
  5.4: Exercises
  5.5: Web Exercises

This page titled 5: Working with People on Projects is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                                1
5.1: Working with Individuals

  Learning Objectives

    1. Describe emotional intelligence.
    2. Describe personality types and tools used to describe them.
    3. Describe the relationship between leadership style and personality types.
    4. Describe people skills that are necessary for negotiation and conflict resolution.
    5. Describe how work is delegated.
    6. Describe individual goals that are related to personality types.

Working with other people involves dealing with them both logically and emotionally. A successful working relationship between
individuals begins with appreciating the importance of emotions and how they relate to personality types, leadership styles,
negotiations, and setting goals.

Emotional Intelligence

Emotions are neither positive nor negative. Emotions are both a mental and physiological response to environmental and internal
stimuli. Leaders need to understand and value their emotions to appropriately respond to the client, project team, and project
environment. Daniel Goleman (Goleman, 1995) discussed emotional intelligence quotient (EQ) as a factor more important than IQ
in predicting leadership success. According to Robert Cooper and Ayman Sawaf, "Emotional intelligence is the ability to sense,
understand, and effectively apply the power and acumens of emotions as a source of human energy, information, connection, and
influence" (Cooper & Sawaf, 1997).

Emotional intelligence includes the following:

    Self-awareness
    Self-regulation
    Empathy
    Relationship management

Emotions are important to generating energy around a concept, to building commitment to goals, and to developing high-
performing teams. Emotional intelligence is an important part of the project manager's ability to build trust among the team
members and with the client. It is an important factor in establishing credibility and an open dialogue with project stakeholders.
Emotional intelligence is a critical ability for project managers, and the more complex the project profile, the more important the
project manager's EQ becomes to project success.

Personality Types

Personality types refer to the difference among people. Understanding your personality type as a project manager will assist you in
understanding your tendencies and strengths in different situations. Understanding personality types can also help you understand
the contributions of various members of your team and the various needs of your client.

There are a number of tools for helping people assess personality types, such as the DISC acronym, which stands for the following:

    Dominance--relates to control, power, and assertiveness
    Influence--relates to social situations and communication
    Steadiness--relates to patience, persistence, and thoughtfulness
    Conscientiousness--relates to structure and organization

These four dimensions are then grouped to represent various personality types.

The Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) is one of most widely used tools for exploring personal preference, with more than two
million people taking the MBTI each year. The MBTI is often referred to as simply the Myers-Briggs. It is a tool that can be used
in project management training to develop awareness of preferences for processing information and relationships with other people.

5.1.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24681
Based on the theories of psychologist Carl Jung, the Myers-Briggs uses a questionnaire to gather information on the ways
individuals prefer to use their perception and judgment. Perception represents the way people become aware of people and their
environment. Judgment represents the evaluation of what is perceived. People perceive things differently and reach different
conclusions based on the same environmental input. Understanding and accounting for these differences is critical to successful
project leadership.

The Myers-Briggs identifies sixteen personality types based on four preferences derived from the questionnaire. The preferences
are between pairs of opposite characteristics and include the following:

    Extroversion (E)-Introversion (I)
    Sensing (S)-Intuition (N)
    Thinking (T)-Feeling (F)
    Judging (J)-Perceiving (P)

Sixteen Myers-Briggs types can be derived from the four dichotomies. Each of the sixteen types describes a preference: for
focusing on the inner or outer world (E-I), for approaching and internalizing information (S-I), for making decisions (T-F), and for
planning (J-P). For example, an ISTJ is a Myers-Briggs type who prefers to focus on the inner world and basic information, prefers
logic, and likes to decide quickly.

It is important to note that there is no best type and that effective interpretation of the Myers-Briggs requires training. The purpose
of the Myers-Briggs is to understand and appreciate the differences among people. This understanding can be helpful in building
the project team, in developing common goals, and communicating with project stakeholders. For example, different people
process information differently. Extraverts prefer face-to-face meetings as the primary means of communicating, while introverts
prefer written communication. Sensing types focus on facts, and intuitive types want the big picture.

On larger, more complex projects, some project managers will use the Myers-Briggs as a team-building tool during project start-up.
This is typically a facilitated work session where team members take the Myers-Briggs and share with the team how they process
information, what communication approaches they prefer, and what decision-making preferences they have. This allows the team
to identify potential areas of conflict, develop communication strategies, and build an appreciation for the diversity of the team.

  Personality Type Badges

  One project team in South Carolina used color-coded badges for the first few weeks of the project to indicate Myers-Briggs
  type. For this team, this was a way to explore how different team members processed information, made decisions, and took
  action.

Some people use a description of personality types that is based on research that shows that some functions of thinking and
perception are localized on the left or right side of the brain. In this system, the left side of the brain is associated with recalling
specific facts and definitions and performing calculations, while the right side of the brain is associated with emotions, estimates,
and comparisons. The attraction of this system is that it categorizes people into just two categories--left or right brain dominance
--but it should be used cautiously to avoid oversimplification.

Understanding the differences among people is a critical leadership skill. This includes understanding how people process
information, how different experiences will influence the way people perceive the environment, and how people develop filters that
allow certain information to be incorporated while other information is excluded. The more complex the project, the more
important the understanding of how people process information, make decisions, and deal with conflict.

Leadership Styles

Leadership is a function of both the personal characteristics of the leader and the environment in which the leadership must occur.
Several researchers have attempted to understand leadership from the perspective of the characteristics of the leader and the
environment of the situation. Robert Tannenbaum and Warren Schmidt (Tannenbaum & Schmidt, 1958). described leaders as either
autocratic or democratic. Harold Leavitt (Leavitt, 1986) described leaders as pathfinders (visionaries), problem solvers (analytical),
or implementers (team oriented). James MacGregor Burns (Burns, 1978) conceived leaders as either transactional (focused on
actions and decisions) or transformational (focused on the long-term needs of the group and organization).

5.1.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24681
Fred Fiedler (Fiedler, 1971) introduced contingency theory and the ability of leaders to adapt their leadership approach to the
environment. Most leaders have a dominant leadership style that is most comfortable. For example, most engineers spend years
training in analytical problem solving and often develop an analytical approach to leadership.

A leadership style reflects personal characteristics and life experiences. Although a project manager's leadership style may be
predominantly a pathfinder (using Leavitt's taxonomy), most project managers become problem solvers or implementers when they
perceive the need for these leadership approaches. The leadership approach incorporates the dominant leadership style and
Fiedler's contingency focus on adapting to the project environment.

No particular leadership approach is specifically appropriate for managing a project. Each project has a unique set of circumstances
because, by definition, projects are unique endeavors. The leadership approach and the management skills required to be successful
vary depending on the complexity profile of the project. The Project Management Institute published research that studied project
management leadership skills (Shi & Chen, 2006) and concluded that project managers needed good communication skills and the
ability to build harmonious relationships and motivate others. Beyond this broad set of leadership skills, the successful leadership
approach will depend of the profile of the project.

A transactional project manager with a strong command and control leadership approach may be very successful on a small
software development project or a construction project, where tasks are clear, roles are well understood, and the project
environment is cohesive. This same project manager is less likely to be successful on a larger, more complex project with a diverse
project team and complicated work processes.

Matching the appropriate leadership style and approach to the complexity profile of the project is a critical element of project
success. Even experienced project managers are less likely to be successful if their leadership approach does not match the
complexity profile of the project.

Each project phase may also require a different leadership approach. During the start-up phase of a project, when new team
members are first assigned to the project, the project may require a command and control leadership approach. Later, as the project
moves into the conceptual development phase, creativity becomes important, and the project management takes on a more
transformational type leadership approach. Most experienced project managers are able to adjust their leadership approach to the
needs of the project phase. Occasionally, on very large, complex projects, some companies will change project managers after the
conceptual phase of the project to bring in a different project leadership approach or change project managers to manage the
closeout of a project. Changing project managers may bring the right level of experience and the appropriate leadership approach
but is also disruptive to a project. Senior management must balance the benefit of matching the right leadership approach with the
cost of disrupting the project.

  Multinational Chemical Plant Project

  On a project to build a new chemical plant that produced dyes for paint, the project manager led a team that included members
  from partners that were included in a joint venture. The design manager was Greek, the construction manager was German, and
  other members of the team were from various locations in the United States and Europe. In addition to the traditional potential
  for conflict that arises from team members from different cultures, the design manager and construction manager were
  responsible for protecting the interest of their company in the joint venture.

The project manager held two alignment or team-building meetings. The first was a two-day meeting held at a local resort and
included only the members of the project leadership team. An outside facilitator was hired to facilitate discussion, and the topic of
cultural conflict and organizational goal conflict quickly emerged. The team discussed several methods for developing
understanding and addressing conflicts that would increase the likelihood of finding mutual agreement. The second team-building
session was a one-day meeting that included the executive sponsors from the various partners in the joint venture. With the project
team aligned, the project manager was able to develop support for the project's strategy and commitment from the executives of the
joint venture. In addition to building processes that would enable the team to address difficult cultural differences, the project
manager focused on building trust with each of the team members. The project manager knew that building trust with the team was
as critical to the success of the project as the technical project management skills and devoted significant management time to
building and maintaining this trust.

5.1.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24681
Negotiation and Conflict Resolution

Einsiedel (Einsiedel, 1987) discussed qualities of successful project managers. The project manager must be perceived to be
credible by the project team and key stakeholders. The project manager can solve problems. A successful project manager has a
high degree of tolerance for ambiguity. On projects, the environment changes frequently, and the project manager must apply the
appropriate leadership approach for each situation.

The successful project manager must have good communication skills. Barry Posner (Posner, 1987) connected project management
skills to solving problems. All project problems were connected to skills needed by the project manager:

    Breakdown in communication represented the lack of communication skills.
    Uncommitted team members represented the lack of team-building skills.
    Role confusion represented the lack of organizational skills.

The research indicates that project managers need a large numbers of skills. These skills include administrative skills,
organizational skills, and technical skills associated with the technology of the project. The types of skills and the depth of the skills
needed are closely connected to the complexity profile of the project. Typically on smaller, less complex projects, project managers
need a greater degree of technical skills. On larger, more complex projects, project managers need more organizational skills to
deal with the complexity. On smaller projects, the project manager is intimately involved in developing the project schedule, cost
estimates, and quality standards. On larger projects, functional managers are typically responsible for managing these aspects of the
project, and the project manager provides the organizational framework for the work to be successful.

Listening

One of the most important communication skills of the project manager is the ability to actively listen. Active listening takes focus
and practice to become effective. Active listening is placing yourself in the speaker's position as much as possible, understanding
the communication from the point of view of the speaker, listening to the body language and other environmental cues, and striving
not just to hear, but to understand.

Active listening enables a project manager to go beyond the basic information that is being shared and to develop a more complete
understanding of the information.

  Client's Body Language Indicates Problems at a Board Meeting

  A client just returned from a trip to Australia where he reviewed the progress of the project with his company's board of
  directors. The project manager listened and took notes on the five concerns expressed by the board of directors to the client.

The project manager observed that the client's body language showed more tension than usual. This was a cue to listen very
carefully. The project manger nodded occasionally and clearly demonstrated he was listening through his posture, small agreeable
sounds, and body language. The project manager then began to provide feedback on what was said using phrases like "What I hear
you say is..." or "It sounds like...." The project manager was clarifying the message that was communicated by the client. The
project manager then asked more probing questions and reflected on what was said. "It sounds as if it was a very tough board
meeting." "Is there something going on beyond the events of the project?" From these observations and questions, the project
manager discovered that the board of directors meeting did not go well. The company had experienced losses on other projects, and
budget cuts meant fewer resources for the project and an expectation that the project would finish earlier than planned. The project
manager also discovered that the client's future with the company would depend on the success of the project. The project manager
asked, "Do you think we will need to do things differently?" They began to develop a plan to address the board of directors'
concerns.

    The project manager used the following techniques:
     1. Listening intently to the words of the client and observing the client's body language
     2. Nodding and expressing interest in the client without forming rebuttals
     3. Providing feedback and asking for clarity while repeating a summary of the information back to the client
     4. Expressing understanding and empathy for the client

5.1.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24681
The active listening was important to establishing a common understanding from which an effective project plan could be
developed.

Negotiation

Negotiation is a process for developing a mutually acceptable outcome when the desired outcome for parties in the negotiation
is sufficiently different that both cannot achieve the desired outcome. A project manager will often negotiate with a client, with
team members, with vendors, and with other project stakeholders. A larger and more complex project will have a large number
of stakeholders, often with conflicting desired outcomes. Negotiation is an important skill in developing support for the project
and preventing frustration among stakeholders, which could delay or cause project failure.

Vijay Verma (Verma, 1996) suggests that negotiations involve four principles:

 1. The first principle is to separate people from the problem. If the person is seen as the problem, then finding a mutually
    acceptable solution will be difficult. Framing the discussions in terms of desired outcomes enables the negotiations to focus
    on finding new outcomes.

 2. The second principle is to focus on common interests. By avoiding the focus on differences, both parties are more open to
    finding solutions that are acceptable.

 3. The third principle is to generate options that advance shared interests. Once the common interests are understood, solutions
    that do not match with either party's interests can be discarded, and solutions that may serve both parties' interests can be
    more deeply explored.

 4. Verma's final principle is to develop results based on standard criteria. The standard criterion is the success of the project.
    This implies that the parties develop a common definition of project success.

For the project manager to successfully negotiate issues on the project, he or she should first seek to understand the position of
the other party. If negotiating with a client, what is the concern or desired outcome of the client? What are the business drivers
and personal drivers that are important to the client? Without this understanding, it is difficult to find a solution that will satisfy
the client. The project manager should also seek to understand what outcomes are desirable to the project. Typically, more than
one outcome is acceptable. Without knowing what outcomes are acceptable, it is difficult to find a solution that will produce
that outcome.

One of the most common issues in formal negotiations is finding a mutually acceptable price for a service or product.
Understanding the market value for a product or service will provide a range for developing a negotiations strategy. The price
paid on the last project or similar projects provides information on the market value. Seeking expert opinions from sources who
would know the market is another source of information. Based on this information, the project manager can then develop an
expected range from the lowest price that would be expected within the current market to the highest price.

Additional factors will also affect the negotiated price. The project manger may be willing to pay a higher price to assure an
expedited delivery or a lower price if delivery can be made at the convenience of the supplier or if payment is made before the
product is delivered. Developing as many options as possible provides a broader range of choices and increases the possibility
of developing a mutually beneficial outcome.

The goal of negotiations is not to achieve the lowest costs, although that is a major consideration, but to achieve the greatest
value for the project. If the supplier believes that the negotiations process is fair and the price is fair, the project is more likely to
receive higher value from the supplier. The relationship with the supplier can be greatly influenced by the negotiation process
and a project manager that attempts to drive the price unreasonably low or below the market value will create an element of
distrust in the relationship that may have negative consequences for the project. A positive negotiation experience may create a
positive relationship that may be beneficial, especially if the project begins to fall behind schedule and the supplier is in a
position to help keep the project on schedule.

  Negotiation on a Construction Project

  After difficult negotiations on a construction project in Indiana, the project management team met with a major project
  supplier and asked, "Now that the negotiations are complete, what can we do to help you make more profit?" Although this
  question surprised the supplier, the team had discussed how information would flow, and confusion in expectations and

5.1.5  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24681
  unexpected changes always cost the supplier more money. The team developed mechanisms for assuring good information
  and providing early information on possible changes and tracked the effect of these efforts during the life of the project.
These efforts and the increased trust did enable the supplier to increase profits on the project, and the supplier made special
efforts to meet every project expectation. During the life of the project, the supplier brought several ideas on how to reduce total
project costs and increase efficiency. The positive outcome was the product of good supplier management by the project team,
but the relationship could not have been successful without good faith negotiations.

Conflict Resolution

Conflict on a project is to be expected because of the level of stress, lack of information during early phases of the project,
personal differences, role conflicts, and limited resources. Although good planning, communication, and team building can
reduce the amount of conflict, conflict will still emerge. How the project manager deals with the conflict results in the conflict
being destructive or an opportunity to build energy, creativity, and innovation.

David Whetton and Kim Cameron (Whetton & Cameron, 2005) developed a response-to-conflict model that reflected the
importance of the issue balanced against the importance of the relationship. The model presented five responses to conflict:

 1. Avoiding
 2. Forcing
 3. Collaborating
 4. Compromising
 5. Accommodating

Each of these approaches can be effective and useful depending on the situation. Project managers will use each of these
conflict resolution approaches depending on the project manager's personal approach and an assessment of the situation.

Most project managers have a default approach that has emerged over time and is comfortable. For example, some project
managers find the use of the project manager's power the easiest and quickest way to resolve problems. "Do it because I said
to" is the mantra for project managers who use forcing as the default approach to resolve conflict. Some project managers find
accommodating with the client the most effective approach to dealing with client conflict.

The effectiveness of a conflict resolution approach will often depend on the situation. The forcing approach often succeeds in a
situation where a quick resolution is needed, and the investment in the decision by the parties involved is low.

  Resolving an Office Space Conflict

  Two senior managers both want the office with the window. The project manager intercedes with little discussion and
  assigns the window office to the manager with the most seniority. The situation was a low-level conflict with no long-range
  consequences for the project and a solution all parties could accept.

Sometimes office size and location is culturally important, and this situation would take more investment to resolve.

  Conflict Over a Change Order

  In another example, the client rejected a request for a change order because she thought the change should have been
  foreseen by the project team and incorporated into the original scope of work. The project controls manager believed the
  client was using her power to avoid an expensive change order and suggested the project team refuse to do the work
  without a change order from the client.

This is a more complex situation, with personal commitments to each side of the conflict and consequences for the project. The
project manager needs a conflict resolution approach that increases the likelihood of a mutually acceptable solution for the
project.

One conflict resolution approach involves evaluating the situation, developing a common understanding of the problem,
developing alternative solutions, and mutually selecting a solution. Evaluating the situation typically includes gathering data. In

5.1.6  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24681
our example of a change order conflict, gathering data would include a review of the original scope of work and possibly of
people's understandings, which might go beyond the written scope.

The second step in developing a resolution to the conflict is to restate, paraphrase, and reframe the problem behind the conflict
to develop a common understanding of the problem. In our example, the common understanding may explore the change
management process and determine that the current change management process may not achieve the client's goal of
minimizing project changes. This phase is often the most difficult and may take an investment of time and energy to develop a
common understanding of the problem.

After the problem has been restated and agreed on, alternative approaches are developed. This is a creative process that often
means developing a new approach or changing the project plan. The result is a resolution to the conflict that is mutually
agreeable to all team members. If all team members believe every effort was made to find a solution that achieved the project
charter and met as many of the team member's goals as possible, there will be a greater commitment to the agreed-on solution.

  Project Goals Accomplished

  In our example, the project team found a new way to accomplish the project goals without a change to the project scope.
  On this project, the solution seemed obvious after some creative discussions, but in most conflict situations, even the most
  obvious solutions can be elusive.

Delegation

Delegating responsibility and work to others is a critical project management skill. The responsibility for executing the project
belongs to the project manager. Often other team members on the project will have a functional responsibility on the project and
report to a functional manager in the parent organization. For example, the procurement leader for a major project may also
report to the organization's vice president for procurement. Although the procurement plan for the project must meet the
organization's procurement policies, the procurement leader on the project will take day-to-day direction from the project
manager. The amount of direction given to the procurement leader, or others on the project, is the decision of the project
manager.

If the project manager delegates too little authority to others to make decisions and take action, the lack of a timely decision or
lack of action will cause delays on the project. Delegating too much authority to others who do not have the knowledge, skills,
or information will typically cause problems that result in delay or increased cost to the project. Finding the right balance of
delegation is a critical project management skill.

When developing the project team, the project manager selects team members with the knowledge, skills, and abilities to
accomplish the work required for the project to be successful. Typically, the more knowledge, skills, abilities, and experience a
project team member brings to the project, the more that team member will be paid. To keep the project personnel costs lower,
the project manager will develop a project team with the level of experience and the knowledge, skills, and abilities to
accomplish the work.

On smaller, less complex projects, the project manager can provide daily guidance to project team members and be consulted on
all major decisions. On larger, more complex projects, there are too many important decisions made every day for the project
manager to be involved at the same level, and project team leaders are delegated decision-making authority. Larger projects,
with a more complex profile will typically pay more because of the need for the knowledge and experience. On larger, more
complex project, the project manager will develop a more experienced and knowledgeable team that will enable the project
manager to delegate more responsibility to these team members.

  Construction Project in Peru

  A construction project in Peru was falling behind schedule, and the project manager decided to assign a new construction
  manager for the construction site that was the most behind schedule. An experienced project manager from the United
  States with a reputation for meeting aggressive schedules was assigned to the construction site and delegated the authority
  to meet scheduled milestones.

5.1.7  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24681
The project manager must have the skills to evaluate the knowledge, skills, and abilities of project team members and evaluate
the complexity and difficulty of the project assignment. Often project managers want project team members they have worked
with in the past. Because the project manager knows the skill level of the team member, project assignments can be made
quickly with less supervision than with a new team member with whom the project manager has little or no experience.

Delegation is the art of creating a project organizational structure with the work organized into units that can be managed.
Delegation is the process of understanding the knowledge, skills, and abilities needed to manage that work and then matching
the team members with the right skills to do that work. Good project managers are good delegators.

Setting Individual Goals

The Myers-Briggs rates an individual's preferences--not their limitations. It is important to understand that each individual can
still function in situations for which they are not best suited. For example, a project leader who is more Thinking (T) than
Feeling (F) would need to work harder to be considerate of how a team member who is more Feeling (F) might react if they
were singled out in a meeting because they were behind schedule. If a person knows their preferences and which personality
types are most successful in each type of project or project phase, they can set goals for improvement in their ability to perform
in those areas that are not their natural preference.

Another individual goal is to examine which conflict resolution styles are least comfortable and work to improve those styles so
that they can be used when they are more appropriate than your default style.

Key Takeaways
    Emotional intelligence is the ability to sense, understand, and effectively apply emotions.
    Two common tools for describing personality types are DISC (Dominance, Influence, Steadiness, and Conscientiousness)
    and the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI). The MBTI is the most common. It rates personalities on the position between
    extremes of four paired terms: Extroversion (E)-Introversion (I), Sensing (S)-Intuition (I), Thinking (T)-Feeling (F), and
    Judging (J)-Perceiving (P).
    Leadership styles are usually related to the personality of the leader. The type of leadership style that is most effective
    depends on the complexity and the phase of the project.
    Negotiation and conflict resolution require skill at listening and an understanding of emotional intelligence and personality
    types.
    Delegation is the art of creating a project organizational structure that can be managed and then matching the team members
    with the right skills to do that work.
    Individual goals can be set for improving abilities that are not natural personality strengths to deal with projects and project
    phases.

Exercises

 1. Ability to sense and understand emotions is called _____ _______ (two words).
 2. A personality assessment tool that is commonly used that identifies preferences between pairs of terms is the MBTI, or more

    commonly known as the ________-________.
 3. What is emotional intelligence?
 4. What do the letters INTJ stand for in a Myers-Briggs personality profile?
 5. How does delegation involve the organization and its people?

Internalize your learning experience by preparing to discuss the following.

Identify which leadership style you think is most suitable for your personality and which is least suitable. Next, identify a level
of project complexity or project phase where your preferred style is least suitable. Describe an individual goal and how you
might pursue that goal for strengthening your ability to lead on that type of project or during that phase.

References

Burns, J. M., Leadership (New York: Harper & Row, 1978).

5.1.8  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24681
    Cooper, R. K. and Ayman Sawaf, Executive EQ, Emotional Intelligence in Leadership and Organizations (New York: Perigree
    Book, 1997), xiii.
    Einsiedel, A. A., "Profile of Effective Project Managers," Project Management Journal 18 (1987): 5.

    Fiedler, F. E., "Validation and Extension of the Contingency Model of Leadership Effectiveness," Psychological Bulletin 76, no.
    2 (1971): 128-48.

    Goleman, D., Emotional Intelligence (New York: Bantam Books, 1995).
    Leavitt, H., Corporate Pathfinders (New York: Dow-Jones-Irwin and Penguin Books, 1986).
    Posner, B. Z., "What It Takes to Be a Good Project Manager," Project Management Journal 18 (1987): 32-46.

    Shi, Q. and Jianguo Chen, The Human Side of Project Management: Leadership Skills (Newtown Square, PA: Project
    Management Institute, Inc., 2006), 4-11.
    Tannenbaum, R. and Warren Schmidt, "How to Choose a Leadership Pattern," Harvard Business Review 36 (1958): 95-101.
    Verma, V. K., Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager (Sylvia, NC: PMI Publications, 1996), 145-75.
    Whetton, D. and Kim Cameron, Developing Management Skills (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education, 2005).

This page titled 5.1: Working with Individuals is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

5.1.9  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24681
5.2: Working with Groups and Teams

  Learning Objectives

    1. Describe the value of trust and how it relates to contracts and complex projects.
    2. Identify four types of trust.
    3. Describe how a project manager can build trust.
    4. Identify three common meeting types and then describe how they differ.
    5. Identity types of teams.
    6. Describe the HUMM method of measuring project performance.
    7. Describe the importance of developing a project story.

A team is a collaboration of people with different personalities that is lead by a person with a favored leadership style. Managing
the interactions of these personalities and styles as a group is an important aspect of project management.

Trust

Trust is the foundation for all relationships within a project. Without a minimum level of trust, communication breaks down, and
eventually the project suffers in the form of costs increasing and schedules slipping. Often, when reviewing a project where the
performance problems have captured the attention of upper management, the evidence of problems is the increase in project costs
and the slippage in the project schedule. The underlying cause is usually blamed on communication breakdown. With deeper
investigation, the communication breakdown is associated with a breakdown in trust.

Filters

On projects, trust is the filter through which we screen information that is shared and the filter we use to screen information we
receive. The more trust that exists, the easier it is for information to flow through the filters. As trust diminishes, the filters become
stronger and information has a harder time getting through, and projects that are highly dependent on an information-rich
environment will suffer from information deprivation.

Contracts and Trust Relationships

The project typically begins with a charter or contract. A contract is a legal agreement that includes penalties for any behavior or
results not achieved. Contracts are based on an adversarial paradigm and do not lend themselves to creating an environment of
trust. Contracts and charters are necessary to clearly establish, among other things, the scope of the project, but they are not
conducive to establishing a trusting project culture.

A relationship of mutual trust is less formal but vitally important. When a person or team enters into a relationship of mutual trust,
each person's reputation and self-respect are the drivers in meeting the intent of the relationship. A relationship of mutual trust
within the context of a project is a commitment to an open and honest relationship. There is nothing that enforces the commitments
in the relationship except the integrity of the people involved. Smaller, less complex projects can operate within the boundaries of a
legal contract, but larger, more complex projects must develop a relationship of mutual trust to be successful.

Types of Trust

Svenn Lindskold (Lindskold, 1978) describes four kinds of trust:

 1. Objective credibility. A personal characteristic that reflects the truthfulness of an individual that can be checked against
    observable facts.

 2. Attribution of benevolence. A form of trust that is built on the examination of the person's motives and the conclusion that they
    are not hostile.

 3. Nonmanipulative trust. A form of trust that correlates to a person's self-interest and the predictability of a person's behavior in
    acting consistent in that self-interest.

 4. High cost of lying. The type of trust that emerges when persons in authority raise the cost of lying so high that people will not
    lie because the penalty will be too high.

5.2.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24682
Creating Trust

Building trust on a project begins with the project manager. On complex projects, the assignment of a project manager with a high
trust reputation can help establish the trust level needed. The project manager can also establish the cost of lying in a way that
communicates an expectation and a value for trust on the project. Project managers can also assure that the official goals (stated
goals) and operational goals (goals that are reinforced) are aligned. The project manager can create an atmosphere where informal
communication is expected and reinforced.

The informal communication is important to establishing personal trust among team members and with the client. Allotting time
during project start-up meetings to allow team members to develop a personal relationship is important to establishing the team
trust. The informal discussion allows for a deeper understanding of the whole person and creates an atmosphere where trust can
emerge.

  High Cost of Lying in a Charleston Project

  On a project in Charleston, South Carolina, the client was asking for more and more backup to information from the project.
  The project manager visited the client to better understand the reporting requirements and discovered the client did not trust the
  reports coming from the project and wanted validating material for each report. After some candid discussion, the project
  manager discovered that one of the project team members had provided information to the client that was inaccurate. The team
  member had made a mistake but had not corrected it with the client, hoping that the information would get lost in the stream of
  information from the project.

    Small events that reduce trust often take place on a project without anyone remembering what happened to create the
    environment of distrust. Taking fast and decisive action to establish a high cost of lying, communicating the expectation of
    honesty, and creating an atmosphere of trust are critical steps a project manager can take to ensure the success of complex
    projects.

    Project managers can also establish expectations of team members to respect individual differences and skills, look and react to
    the positives, recognize each other's accomplishments, and value people's self-esteem to increase a sense of the benevolent
    intent.

   Managing Team Meetings

    Team meetings are conducted differently depending on the purpose of the meeting, the leadership style that is appropriate for
    the meeting, and the personality types of the members of the team.

   Action Item Meetings

    Action item meetings are short meetings to develop a common understanding of what the short-term priorities are for the
    project, individual roles, and expectations for specific activities. This type of meeting is for sharing, not problem solving. Any
    problems that emerge from the discussion are assigned to a person, and another meeting is established to address the issue.
    Action item meetings focus on short-term activities, usually less than a week in duration.

    The action item meeting is fact based and information oriented. It is a left-brain-type focus. The action item meeting has very
    little dialogue except to ask clarification questions. If discussion is needed or disagreement is not easily resolved, another
    problem-solving meeting is established to deal with that issue. On smaller topics, that meeting might take place immediately
    after the action item meeting and only include those people with an interest in the outcome of the discussion.

    The project manager keeps the successful action item meeting short in duration and focused on only those items of information
    needed for the short-term project plan. The project manager will restate the common understandings of what activities are
    priorities and who will be responsible for the activities. Often these meetings can include a review of safety procedures or
    security procedures when these issues are important to the project. The leadership approach to action item meetings focuses on
    data, actions, and commitments. Although the project manager may observe stresses between project team members or other
    issues, they are not addressed in this meeting. These are fact-based meetings. If issues begin to arise between people, the project
    manager will develop other opportunities to address these issues in another forum. Using the Myers-Briggs descriptions, team

5.2.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24682
members who favor thinking more than feeling and judging more than perceiving are more comfortable with this type of
meeting.

Management Meetings

Management meetings are longer in duration and are focused on planning. They are oriented toward developing plans, tracking
progress of existing plans, and making adjustments to plans in response to new information.

These meetings include focused discussion on generating a common understanding of the progress of the existing plan. This
discussion is based on quantitative information provided on the progress of the schedule and other data, but the discussion is
qualitative in evaluating the data to develop a more complete understanding of the data. The experience and opinions of the
project leaders are solicited, and disagreement about meaning of the data is even encouraged to develop a deeper understanding
of the data. Through this discussion, a common understanding of the status of the project should emerge, and the project
manager invites discussion, includes people to offer their thoughts, and assures that disagreements are positive discussions
about interpretation of the information and that disagreements do not become personal.

Management meetings also focus on developing midterm goals. For larger, more complex projects, the goals may be monthly or
even quarterly. For smaller or less complex projects, weekly goals will provide the focus. The project manager focuses the
discussion on the broad priorities for the next period and includes all the functional leaders in the discussion. The goals that
emerge from the discussion should represent a common understanding of the priorities of the project for the next term.

For example, during the early phases of a project, the team is focused on developing a conceptual understanding of the project.
A major milestone on complex projects is typically the completion of the conceptual plan. The project manager would lead a
discussion on what needs to be accomplished to meet the project milestone and asks what potential barriers exist and what key
resources are needed. From the discussion, the project team develops a few key goals that integrate the various functions of the
project team and focus the team on priorities.

The following are some examples of goals during the conceptual phase:

    Developing a list of the procurement long lead items and defining critical dates
    Developing a human resources plan that identifies critical positions
    Developing and building agreement with the client on the project scope of work

Each of these goals is measurable and time framed. They can be developed as positive motivators and will take the project
leaders and most of the project team to accomplish. They develop a general understanding of the priorities and are easy to
remember.

Management meetings are a combination of left-brain thinking, which is fact based, and right-brain thinking, which is creative
and innovative. Using the Myers-Briggs terminology, team members who prefer feeling over thinking and perceiving over
judging can contribute ideas and perspectives on the project that the more fact-oriented members might miss.

The project manager allows and encourages conversation in developing and evaluating the goals but focuses the discussion on
the goals and obstacles. Management meetings take on a different focus during the month. Meetings at the beginning of the
month spend time addressing the progress and potential barriers to the goals developed the previous month. During the middle
of the month, the project manager leads the team to develop next month's goals as the team also works on the current month's
goals. Toward the end of the month as the goals for the month are accomplished, the meeting focuses more on the next month,
enabling the team to remain goal focused during the life of the project.

Management meetings are also an opportunity to discover obstacles to goal achievement. The project team reallocates resources
or develops alternative methods for accomplishing the goals. As the project team discusses the progress of project goals, the
project manger explores possible obstacles and encourages exposing potential problems in achieving goals. The project
manager focuses the team on finding solutions and avoids searching for blame.

The project manager uses a facilitative leadership approach, encouraging the management team to contribute their ideas, and
builds consensus on what goals will bring the appropriate focus. The project manager keeps the focus on developing the goals,
tracking progress, identifying barriers, and making adjustments to accomplish the management goals. Although there are
typically meetings for scheduling and procurement and other meetings where goals are established and problems solved, the

5.2.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24682
management meeting and the goal development process create alignment among the project leadership on the items critical to
the project's success.

Leadership Meetings

Leadership meetings are held less frequently and are longer in length. These meetings are used by the project manager to reflect
on the project, to explore the larger issues of the project, and to back away from the day-to-day problem solving. The project
manager will create a safe environment for sharing thoughts and evaluations of issues that are less data oriented. This is a right-
brained, creative meeting that focuses on the people issues of the project: the relationship with the client, vendors, and project
team. Team members who favor feeling, perceiving, and intuition often contribute valuable insights in this type of meeting. The
team might also share perceptions by upper management and perceptions of the community in which the project is being
executed. Where the time frame for action item meetings is in weeks and management meetings is in months, the time frame for
leadership meetings is longer and takes in the entire length and impact of the project.

The project manager's meeting management skill includes creating the right meeting atmosphere for the team discussion that is
needed. For discussions based on data and facts, the project manager creates the action item type meeting. The conversation is
focused on sharing information and clarification. The conversation for leadership meetings is the opposite. Discussion is more
open ended and focused on creativity and innovation. Because each type of meeting requires a different meeting atmosphere,
mixing the purposes of a meeting will make it difficult for the project manager to develop and maintain the appropriate kind of
conversation.

Skilled project managers know what type of meeting is needed and how to develop an atmosphere to support the meeting type.
Meetings of the action item type are focused on information sharing with little discussion. They require efficient
communication of plans, progress, and other information team members need to plan and execute daily work. Management type
meetings are focused on developing and progressing goals. Leadership meetings are more reflective and focused on the project
mission and culture.

These three types of meetings do not cover all the types of project meetings. Specific problem-solving, vendor evaluation, and
scheduling meetings are examples of typical project meetings. Understanding what kinds of meetings are needed on the project
and creating the right focus for each meeting type is a critical project management skill.

Types of Teams

Teams can outperform individual team members in several situations. The effort and time invested in developing a team and the
work of the team are large investments of project resources, and the payback is critical to project success. Determining when a
team is needed and then chartering and supporting the development and work of the team is another critical project management
ability.

Teams are effective in several project situations:

    When no one person has the knowledge, skills, and abilities to either understand or solve the problem
    When a commitment to the solution is needed by large portions of the project team
    When the problem and solution cross project functions
    When innovation is required

Individuals can outperform teams on some occasions. An individual tackling a problem consumes fewer resources than a team
and can operate more efficiently--as long as the solution meets the project's needs. A person is most appropriate in the
following situations:

    When speed is important
    When one person has the knowledge, skills, and resources to solve the problem
    When the activities involved in solving the problem are very detailed
    When the actual document needs to be written (Teams can provide input, but writing is a solitary task.)

In addition to knowing when a team is appropriate, the project manager must also understand what type of team will function
best.

5.2.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24682
Functional Teams

A functional team refers to the team approach related to the project functions. The engineering team, the procurement team, and
the project controls team are examples of functional teams within the project. On a project with a low complexity profile that
includes low technological challenges, good team member experience, and a clear scope of work, the project manager can
utilize well-defined functional teams with clear expectations, direction, and strong vertical communication.

Cross-Functional Teams

Cross-functional teams address issues and work processes that include two or more of the functional teams. The team members
are selected to bring their functional expertise to addressing project opportunities.

  Cross-Functional Teamwork on Concrete Project

  A cross-functional project team in Tennessee was assigned to develop a project approach to procuring, delivering, and
  erecting precast concrete without storing the concrete on the site. Although the complexity of this goal is primarily related
  to delivering the precast concrete in a sequence that will allow erection from the delivery trucks, the planning involved
  coordination of the design, procurement, and project controls. Team members from each of these functions developed and
  tracked a plan to meet the project goal. The cross-functional team was successful in designing a process and executing the
  plan in a way that saved three weeks on the schedule and several thousand dollars in cost.

Problem-Solving Teams

Problem-solving teams are assigned to address specific issues that arise during the life of the project. The project leadership
includes members that have the expertise to address the problem. The team is chartered to address that problem and then
disband.

  Problem-Solving Teamwork on Equipment Manufacturing

  On a project in Indiana, a company selected to design and build a critical piece of equipment began having financial
  problems, and the delivery of the equipment on the date needed by the project was at risk. A problem-solving team was
  chartered to assess the problem and develop a solution for the project. The team brought in some accounting expertise from
  the parent company and assessed the status of the vendor. The engineering team assessed the current state of the design, and
  the construction team developed an alternative schedule to allow for a late delivery of the equipment. The team developed a
  plan to support the vendor with funds and expertise that allowed the project to complete on time. The problem-solving team
  was organized to address a specific problem, developed and executed a plan to address the problem, and then was
  disbanded.

Qualitative Assessment of Project Performance

Project managers should provide an opportunity to ask such questions as "What is your gut feeling about how the project
going?" and "How do you think our client perceives the project?" This creates the opportunity for reflection and dialogue
around larger issues on the project. The project manager creates an atmosphere for the team to go beyond the data and search
for meaning. This type of discussion and reflection is very difficult in the stress of day-to-day problem solving.

The project manager has several tools for developing good quantitative information--based on numbers and measurements--
such as the project schedules, budgets and budget reports, risk analysis, and goal tracking. This quantitative information is
essential to understanding the current status and trends on the project. Just as important is the development of qualitative
information--comparisons of qualities--such as judgments made by expert team members that go beyond the quantitative data
provided in a report. Some would label this the "gut feeling" or intuition of experienced project managers.

The Humm Factor is a tool developed by Russ Darnall (Caudron, 1995) to capture the thoughts of project participants that are
not reflected in the project reporting tools. The Humm Factor derived its name from a project manager who always claimed he
could tell you more by listening to the hum of the project than reading all the project reports. The tool developed qualitative
information for the project manager and leadership team.

5.2.5  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24682
The Humm Factor is essentially a survey that is developed during the early phases of the project. A series of questions are
selected from a database of questions that are designed to elicit responses that require reflection and do not require data. "Do
you feel the project is doing the things it needs to do to stay on schedule?" and "Is the project team focused on project goals?"
are the types of questions that can be included in the Humm Factor. The qualitative responses are converted to a quantitative
value as a score from 1 to 10.

Someone on the project or assigned to support the project is responsible for distributing the survey on a weekly or less frequent
basis depending on the complexity profile of the project. A project with a high level of complexity due to team-based and
cultural issues will be surveyed more frequently.

Responses are tracked by individual and by total project, resulting in qualitative comparisons over time. The project team
reviews the ratings regularly, looking for trends that indicate an issue may be emerging on the project that might need exploring.

  Humm Survey Uncovers Concern About a Vendor

  On a project in South Carolina, the project surveyed the project leadership with a Humm Survey each week. The Humm
  Factor indicated an increasing worry about the schedule beginning to slip when the schedule reports indicated that
  everything was according to plan. When the project manager began trying to understand why the Humm Factor was
  showing concerns about the schedule, he discovered an apprehension about the performance of a critical project supplier.
  When he asked team members, they responded, "It was the way they answered the phone or the hesitation when providing
  information--something didn't feel right."

The procurement manager visited the supplier and discovered the company was experiencing financial problems and had
serious cash flow problems. The project manager was able to develop a plan to help the supplier through the period, and the
supplier eventually recovered. The project was able to meet performance goals. The Humm Factor Survey provided a tool for
members of the project team to express concerns that were based on very soft data, and the project team was able to discover a
potential problem. Another project team used the Humm Factor to survey the client monthly. The completed surveys went to a
person who was not on the project team to provide anonymity to the responses. The responses were discussed at the monthly
project review meetings, and the project manager summarized the results and addressed all the concerns expressed in the report.
"I don't feel my concerns are being heard" was one response that began increasing during the project, and the project manager
spent a significant portion of the next project review meeting attempting to understand what this meant. The team discovered
that as the project progressed toward major milestones, the project team became more focused on solving daily problems, spent
more time in meetings, and their workday was becoming longer. The result was fewer contacts with the clients, slower
responses in returning phone calls, and much fewer coffee breaks where team members could casually discuss the project with
the client. The result of the conversation led to better understanding by both the project team and client team of the change in
behavior based on the current phase of the project and the commitment to developing more frequent informal discussion about
the project.

Developing a Project Story

Every project develops a story. It is the short explanation that project team members give when asked about the project. This is
also called the elevator speech, which is the explanation a person would give if he or she were in the elevator with the CEO and
the CEO asked him or her to describe the project. Project stories often express important aspects of the project and can create a
positive picture of the project or one that is less appealing.

A project story will develop, and creating a positive project story is a project management skill that helps the project. A positive
project story is inviting to people and helps with the recruitment of talent to the project. A positive project story also helps when
services are needed from functional departments within the company and in developing management support for the project.

Creation of the project story is an active process. The project manager actively sets out to create the story. Every project, by
definition, is unique. Creating the positive story entails identifying those unique aspects of the project and building a positive
outcome.

5.2.6  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24682
  Project Story of a Drug to Save Lives

  A pharmaceutical project team in Colorado was building a plant to produce a drug that would save lives. The faster the
  plant was completed, the more lives would be affected by the drug. One story addressed the challenges of designing and
  building a plant in record time. A second story emerged: the balance of safety against speed. Safety procedures limited the
  number of subcontractors and people working in the same area.

To accomplish the work, the project team found creative ways of accomplishing the work off-site and scheduling work to
minimize safety problems while meeting aggressive timelines. The story became the challenge. People identified with the
challenge and wanted to be part of the success.

  Building a Reputation for Project Completion Speed

  A project manager in South Carolina always challenged people with speed. He identified the last project with similar
  characteristics and challenged the team to beat the time by weeks or months. The story became, "If you want a project done
  on time, this is the project team you need." The project manager created a spirit of competition and fun. The project
  manager was a high-energy person, and the idea of finding a way to finish a project early seemed a natural outcome.

Every project manager can find the unique aspect of the project and build a sense of specialness about the project. The project
becomes a good place to work, provides the team with a sense of accomplishment, and becomes the story created by the project
manager.

Key Takeaways
    Trust is important to reduce delays caused by excessive filtering and fact checking. Contracts are specific about the project
    scope, but personal relationships of mutual trust are necessary on complex projects.
    Four types of trust are objective credibility, attribution of benevolence, nonmanipulation, and a high cost of lying.
    To create trust, the project manager needs a reputation for trustworthiness and needs to align official goals with operational
    goals, establish a high cost of lying, and create an atmosphere of respect and benevolent intent.
    Meeting types are action item, management, and leadership. Action item meetings focus on specific short-term priorities.
    Management meetings focus on planning, and leadership meetings focus on larger issues.
    The types of teams are functional, cross-functional, and problem solving.
    The Humm Factor measures project performance and uses a questionnaire to identify qualitative information about project
    performance.
    A short statement of the purpose and character of the project is useful in recruiting and obtaining support for a project.

Exercises

 1. A type of trust that is formed by observing that a person's truthfulness is supported by observable facts is called ________
    _________ (two words).

 2. A type of trust that is formed by knowing that the other person would not risk the penalties for being untruthful is called the
    high cost of ________.

 3. A type of trust that is formed by knowing that the other person is acting in his or her own self-interest is called ___-
    ________ trust.

 4. A type of trust that is formed by evaluating a person's motives and concluding that they are not hostile is called an attribute
    of ________________.

 5. To create trust, a manager should align official goals with ______ goals.
 6. The Humm Factor is a method to collect ________ information about a project that indicates the "gut feeling" that the

    project team has about a project.
 7. A short statement about the project that captures its purpose and character that could be relayed in less than a minute is

    called an _________ story.
 8. How does lack of trust affect filtering of information, and how does that affect the project?
 9. What are four types of trust?

5.2.7  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24682
   10. How can a manager create trust?
    11. What are three main meeting types and what are their characteristics?
   12. How do functional, cross-functional, and problem-solving teams differ from each other?
   13. What is the purpose of the Humm Factor?

    Internalize your learning experience by preparing to discuss the following.

        Consider someone you met recently and whom you felt you could trust. Which of the four types of trust do you think you
        have for this person? Is there a relationship of mutual trust between you? If so, what would be an example of something
        each of you would trust the other to do? What would be an example of a project team function or type of team where this
        trust would be beneficial?

   References

    Caudron, S., "Industry's Unsung Heroes," Industry Week, December 4, 1995, 12-16.

    Lindskold, S., "Trust Development, the GRIT Proposal, and the Effects of Conciliatory Acts on Conflict and Corporation,"
    Psychological Bulletin 85, no. 4 (1978): 772-93.

This page titled 5.2: Working with Groups and Teams is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

5.2.8  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24682
5.3: Creating a Project Culture

  Learning Objectives

    1. Describe how project culture is developed and enforced.
    2. Describe how differences in culture between stakeholders can influence the project.
    3. Describe the role of innovation on projects.

Project managers have a unique opportunity during the start-up of a project. They create a project culture, something organizational
managers seldom have a chance to do. In most organizations, the corporate or organizational culture has developed over the life of
the organization, and people associated with the organization understand what is valued, what has status, and what behaviors are
expected. Edgar Schein defined culture as a pattern of basic assumptions formed by a group on how to perceive and address
problems associated with both internal adaptation and external integration (Schein, 1990). Schein also described organizational
culture as an abstract concept that constrains, stabilizes, and provides structure to the organization. At the same time, culture is
being constantly enacted, created, and shaped by leadership behavior.

Characteristics of Project Culture

A project culture represents the shared norms, beliefs, values, and assumptions of the project team. Understanding the unique
aspects of a project culture and developing an appropriate culture to match the complexity profile of the project are important
project management abilities.

Culture is developed through the communication of

    the priority
    the given status
    the alignment of official and operational rules

Official rules are the rules that are stated, and operational rules are the rules that are enforced. Project managers who align official
and operational rules are more effective in developing a clear and strong project culture because the project rules are among the
first aspects of the project culture to which team members are exposed when assigned to the project.

  Operational Rules on a Project in India

  During the start-up of a project in India, members of the project team were given a policy that stated all travel expense claims
  must be submitted within three days of completion of travel. During the first few weeks, the administrative team began to
  understand that this was a difficult policy to enforce without creating morale problems on the project. Instead of changing the
  official rule, it was seldom enforced. The official rules and operational rules differed.

    In addition to official and operational rules, the project leadership communicates what is important by the use of symbols,
    storytelling, rituals, rewards or punishments, and taboos.

      Creating a Culture of Safety

       A project manager in South America who wanted to create a strong safety culture on a construction project with significant
       safety concerns used several methods to create the desired culture. In the first meeting that project team members attended
       upon joining the project was a safety orientation. Members were issued a card--a symbol--after the meeting granting
       permission to participate on the project. The project leadership team told stories of previous projects where people were
       fired for breaking safety rules and often warned that the fastest way to get fired on the project was to break a safety rule--
       an example of storytelling. Every project meeting started with a discussion of a safety topic--a ritual--and any discussion
       of lessening the safety rules was forbidden--taboo--and was quickly and strongly cut off by the project leadership if it
       occurred.

5.3.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24683
Culture guides behavior and communicates what is important and is useful for establishing priorities. On projects that have a
strong safety culture, team members feel free to challenge anyone who breaks a safety rule, even managers. The safety aspects
of culture are stronger than the cultural aspects of the power of management.

Culture of Stakeholders

When project stakeholders do not share a common culture, project management must adapt its organizations and work
processes to cope with cultural differences. The following are three major aspects of cultural difference that can affect a project:

 1. Communications
 2. Negotiations
 3. Decision making

Communication is perhaps the most visible manifestation of culture. Project managers encounter cultural differences in
communication in language, context, and candor. Language is clearly the highest barrier to communication. When project
stakeholders do not share the same language, communication slows down and is often filtered to share only information that is
deemed critical. The barrier to communication can influence project execution where quick and accurate exchange of ideas and
information is critical.

The interpretation of information reflects the extent that context and candor influence cultural expressions of ideas and
understanding of information. In some cultures, an affirmative answer to a question does not always mean yes. The cultural
influence can create confusion on a project where project stakeholders share more than one culture.

  Culture Affects Communication in Mumbai

  A project management consultant from the United States was asked to evaluate the effectiveness of a U.S. project
  management team executing a project in Mumbai, India. The project team reported that the project was on schedule and
  within budget. After a project review meeting where each of the engineering leads reported that the design of the project
  was on schedule, the consultant began informal discussions with individual engineers and began to discover that several
  critical aspects of the project were behind schedule, and without a mitigating strategy, the project would miss a critical
  window in the weather between monsoon seasons. The information on the project flowed through a cultural expectation to
  provide positive information. The project was eventually cancelled by the U.S.-based corporation when the market and
  political risks increased.

Not all cultural differences are related to international projects. Corporate cultures and even regional differences can create
cultural confusion on a project.

  Cultural Differences between American Regions

  On a major project in South America that included project team leaders from seven different countries, the greatest cultural
  difference that affected the project communication was between two project leaders from the United States. Two team
  members--one from New Orleans and one from Brooklyn--had more difficulty communicating than team members from
  Lebanon and Australia.

Innovation on Projects

The requirement of innovation on projects is influenced by the nature of the project. Some projects are chartered to develop a
solution to a problem, and innovation is a central ingredient of project success. A project to develop a vaccine in response to a
recent flu outbreak is an example of a project where innovation is important to achieving the purpose of the project.

Innovation is also important to developing methods of lowering costs or shortening the schedule. Traditional project
management thinking provides a trade-off between cost, quality, and schedule. A project sponsor can typically shorten the
project schedule with an investment of more money or a lowering of quality. Finding innovative solutions can sometimes lower
costs while also saving time and maintaining the quality.

5.3.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24683
  Innovation on a Steel Plant Project

  On a project to design and build a plant to make steel using new technology, the project leadership was committed to
  generating cost savings on the project that would allow needed technical modifications later on during the project. The
  project was in the early design phase, and the project leadership established a goal for generating $1 million in cost saving
  suggestions. The goal was established in early fall, and the project manager declared that he would swim the lake on the
  day of the project review in February if the project met its goal.
A process was established to track cost saving ideas using highly visible green paper for documenting ideas, and a chart was
placed on the project communication wall recognizing people and teams that submitted ideas. Each team was allocated a
specific cost savings goal, and a team lunch was provided when the goals were met. The project manager created a balance
between the message that this is a serious goal and that the project will have some fun with the process. On one occasion, the
project manager talked with the electrical engineering lead to understand why no suggestions were emerging from the electrical
design team. The electrical design team was struggling to maintain the project schedule and did not have time to focus on
project contests. The project manager emphasized that the project had several goals, and generating the cost savings for the
client was an important project goal. The electrical engineering lead gathered some senior electrical engineers into a small
conference room, and for the next three hours, this impromptu team reviewed electrical drawings and concepts and began to
generate ideas on how to accomplish the design specifications and cut costs. The electrical engineering lead maintained a flip
chart in the front of the conference room, and as soon as the team found enough savings to meet the electrical target, the team
disbanded and went back to working on the electrical design.
Innovation is a creative process that requires both fun and focus. Fun reduces the amount of stress on the project. Stress is a
biological reaction to perceived threats. Stress, at appropriate levels, can make the work environment interesting and even
challenging. Many people working on projects enjoy a high-stress, exciting environment. When the stress level is too high, the
biological reaction increases blood flow to the emotional parts of the brain and decreases the blood flow to the creative parts of
the brain, making creative problem solving more difficult. Project managers recognize the benefits of balancing the stress level
on the project with the need to create an atmosphere that enables creative thought.

  Stress Managed on Steel Project

  The electrical lead engineer on the steel project was able to create the environment for the electrical team to focus on the
  electrical design and explore alternative designs that could generate cost savings. The electrical lead also saw the
  investment in creating cost savings as an addition to the job. The electrical team stopped to contribute to the project goal
  and went back to the design work once the electrical cost-saving target was met.

Exploring opportunities to create savings takes an investment of time and energy, and on a time-sensitive project, the project
manager must create the motivation and the opportunity for creative thinking.

Key Takeaways
    Project culture is developed by communicating priority, status, and the alignment of official and operational rules. It is
    enforced through use of symbols, storytelling, rituals, rewards or punishments, and taboos.
    Differences in culture between stakeholders can affect communications, negotiations, and decision making.
    Innovation can be the main focus of the project, or it can be used to achieve improvement in goals that are usually mutually
    exclusive, such as lowering costs and shortening schedule.

Exercises

 1. The project ________ is developed by communicating what is important, communicating what gives status, and aligning
    operational and official rules.

 2. How can innovation achieve improvement in goals?

Internalize your learning experience by preparing to discuss the following.

    Describe a team project with which you are familiar where the objective was to find an innovative solution. What was the
    level of stress and how was it managed to support an innovative atmosphere?

5.3.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24683
References

Schein, E., "Organizational Culture," American Psychologist 45 (1990): 109-19.

This page titled 5.3: Creating a Project Culture is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

5.3.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24683
5.4: Exercises

Exercises at the end of the chapter are designed to strengthen your understanding and retention of the information recently acquired
in the chapter.

Essay Questions

Write several paragraphs to provide more in-depth analysis and consideration when answering the following questions.

 1. Describe two situations that involve delegating work to other people. The first is a positive example that worked well, and the
    other is one that did not. Analyze the reasons for the success and failure of the two examples using the information about trust
    and personality types from this chapter.

 2. Choose a project with which you are familiar that does not have a good elevator story. Attempt to create one and explain how it
    could be used to promote the project.

Discussion

The exercises in this section are designed to promote exchange of information among students in the classroom or in an online
discussion. The exercises are more open ended, which means that what you find might be completely different from what your
classmates find, and you can all benefit by sharing what you have learned.

 1. Describe a project where trust or distrust became a major factor in the success or failure of the project. Using the four kinds of
    trust described by Lindskold, explain how trust was formed or lost. Consider the descriptions offered by other students of their
    trust experiences and identify a situation where one of the same types of trust was established or lost. Compare the effects on
    both projects.

 2. Describe a project where differences in culture affected communications, negotiations, or decision making.

This page titled 5.4: Exercises is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

5.4.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24684
5.5: Web Exercises

  Learning Objectives

    1. Describe the characteristics of the Myers-Briggs personality profile.
    2. Describe the characteristics of emotional intelligence.
    3. Locate, download, and analyze meeting agenda examples.

Explore Personality Testing

A popular tool for categorizing personality types is the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI). In this exercise, you learn about the
MBTI and other tests based on the personality types described by psychologist Carl Jung.

MBTI

 1. Start a web browser and go to the Myers and Briggs Foundation website by typing http://www.myersbriggs.org/my-mbti-
    personality-type/mbti-basics.

 2. Read the section titled MBTI Basics.
 3. Scroll down to the table of sixteen personality types. Move the mouse pointer over one of the types to display the pop-up

    window that shows the explanation of that type.
 4. Point to one of the other types in the table and then capture the screen.
 5. Open a Word document. In the first line, type your name. Below your name, paste the screen capture.
 6. Save that document as Ch05MBStudentName.doc using the Word 2003 .doc file format.
 7. Switch back to the web page. Below the table, click All types are equal to move to that web page. Read the page.
 8. Capture a portion of the All types are equal page and paste it into the Word document.
 9. Leave the word processing document open.

Free Online Personality Tests

The Myers-Briggs test is administered and interpreted by trained and certified people who help explain the meaning of the results.
This is an important function because terms like introvert do not mean what many people normally assume them to mean, and self-
evaluation can be misinterpreted. It can still be instructive to take one of the free, online tests that are similar to the MBTI.

 1. In a web browser, type http://www.humanmetrics.com/cgi-win/jtypes1.htm.
 2. Follow the directions to take the Jung Typology Test (it consists of seventy-two Yes/No questions).
 3. Display the test score, as shown in Figure 5.13 "Example of a Result", except it may be any of the sixteen types.

                                                                      Figure 5.13 Example of a Result
   Source: Courtesy of www.humanmetrics.com.
4. Notice the brief explanation in bulleted list format. Capture this screen and paste it into the word processing document.

5.5.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24685
5. Return to the Myers and Briggs Foundation website by typing http://www.myersbriggs.org/my-mbti-personality-type/mbti-
   basics. Scroll down to the table of types and click the one that corresponds to your score from the other website. Capture the
   screen and paste it into the word processing document.

6. Below the screens, reflect on what you learned about the MBTI and the Jung personality types. Relate any experiences you
   might have had with this personality typing and your impressions of its accuracy in describing your personality.

7. Review your work and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

Element                          Best                              Adequate      Poor

File name                        Ch05MBStudentName.doc             Ch05MBStudentName.docx Another file name

Describe the characteristics of  First line with name; four        Same as Best  Some screens missing or not
the Myers-Briggs personality     screen captures that show one                   matching the test result
profile                          of the types in the table, a
                                 screen from the All types are
                                 equal page, the results of your
                                 test, and that type on the table

 8. Save the file and submit it as directed by the instructor.

Emotional Intelligence: Developing a Strong Mind[1]

In the project management profession, developing strong people skills helps management understand how to deal with personality
types, like the Myers-Briggs test uses the emotional intelligence test site to develop strong career building skills. Mind Tools helps
develop strong people skills.

 1. Start a web browser and go to the Mind Tools website at http://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/newCDV_59.htm.

    Read the first page, including the sections titled

        Developing Strong "People Skills"
        What Is Emotional Intelligence
        Characteristics of Emotional Intelligence
        How to Improve Your Emotional Intelligence

                                                        5.5.2                    https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24685
                                                                    Figure 5.14 Mind Tools homepage

   Source: Courtesy of www.mindtools.com.
2. Open MS Word and save a new document as Ch5EQStudentName.doc.
3. Click the Play button on the video. Capture a screen that shows the video playing and then paste it into your Word document.
4. In a browser, type www.ihhp.com/testsite.htm.

                                                   Figure 5.15 Institute for Health and Human Potential homepage

   Source: Courtesy of The Institute for Health and Human Potential.

5. Begin the test and fill out the first few questions. Copy the screen and then paste it into your Word document.
6. Complete the test and then click the Evaluate button.
7. In the Word document below the screen captures, reflect on what you learned about emotional intelligence (EQ) and then

   describe how being more aware of EQ might improve the work environment on a project.
8. Review your work and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

5.5.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24685
Element                          Best                             Adequate                        Poor
                                                                                                  Another file name
File name                        Ch05EQStudentName.doc            Ch05EQStudentName.docx
                                                                                                  Some screens missing; very
Describe the characteristics of  First line with name; four       Correct screen captures with a  brief essay that did not cover
emotional intelligence           screen captures that show the    reflective essay between one    both objectives
                                 video playing and the first few  hundred and two hundred
                                 questions of the EQ test; a      words
                                 reflective essay of two
                                 hundred to three hundred
                                 words in which you describe
                                 what you learned and how it
                                 might be useful on a project

9. Save the document, and then submit it as directed by your instructor.

Use Templates to Standardize Project Development

Different types of meetings have different objectives. To achieve those objectives, it helps to organize the agenda of the meeting
around those objectives and to sequence them properly. Studying examples used by other organizations will assist in choosing an
agenda that suits the purpose of a meeting.

How to Download a Meeting Agenda

 1. Open a blank word processing document and type your name and date on the first line. Save the file as
    Ch05MeetingsStudentName using the Word 2003 file format that ends with .doc.

 2. Start a web browser program and go to the Project Management Guidebooks and Templates page for the State of North Dakota
    at www.nd.gov/itd/standards/project-management/project-management-guidebooks-and-templates. A list of links displays, as
    shown in Figure 5.16 "North Dakota Projects"

                                                                    Figure 5.16 North Dakota Projects

   Source: Courtesy of the North Dakota Information Technology Department.

3. Add this website to your browser's favorites list, in a folder named Projects.
4. Capture a screen that shows a link to this site in the Projects folder of your bookmarks or favorites, and then paste it into the

   word processing document.

                                                        5.5.4                                     https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24685
5. On the web page, under Managing Projects, click Project Kickoff Meeting Agenda Template (25kb rtf). Notice the file is labeled
   "25kb rtf," which means that it is a small file saved in rich text format (rtf). The rtf format is a standard format that virtually all
   word processing programs can read.

6. Save the file to your computer and then open it.
7. Review the topics and the time allowed for each topic.
8. Near the top of the page, select the placeholder text to the right of Project, and then type Classwork for StudentName, where

   you use your name.
9. Capture a screen that shows your modification to the agenda and paste it into the word processing document.

Analysis

 1. Compare this agenda with the concepts described in the text. Address the following questions:

What type of meeting is this (action item, management, or leadership)? Support your analysis with references to the sample
agenda and quotations from the text.
Is this agenda designed to build trust? Compare this agenda to the section in the text titled Creating Trust.

2. At the bottom of the word processing document, write an essay of between two hundred and five hundred words that consists of
   two parts that address these two questions.

3. Review your work and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

Element                        Best                             Adequate                           Poor

File name                      Ch05MeetingsStudentName.d        Ch05MeetingsStudentName            Another file name
                               oc

Locate, download, and analyze  Name on first line; screen       Name on first line; screen         Missing or incomplete screen
meeting agenda examples        captures that show the web       captures that show the web         captures; an essay that is too
                               link in the Project folder of    link in the Project folder of      general and that doesn't
                               your browser's favorites and     your browser's favorites and       address the questions or does
                               an image of the agenda with      an image of the agenda with        not demonstrate an intimate
                               your name next to Project; a     your name next to Project; a       familiarity with the text or
                               two-part essay that addresses    single paragraph that addresses    sample
                               the two questions with specific  the two questions with
                               references in the text and in    paraphrased references in the
                               the sample agenda to support     text and in the sample agenda
                               your analysis                    to support your analysis

 4. Save Ch05MeetingsStudentName and submit it as directed by the instructor. Close all documents and programs.

 1. Based on a graduate project by Bonnie Jankovic, December 2011. 

This page titled 5.5: Web Exercises is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                     5.5.5                                                         https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24685
CHAPTER OVERVIEW

6: Communication Technologies

  6.1: Types of Communication
  6.2: Selecting Software
  6.3: Exercises
  6.4: Web Exercise
  6.5: Software and Technology Exercises
This page titled 6: Communication Technologies is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                                                                              1
6.1: Types of Communication

  Learning Objectives

    1. Identify characteristics and examples of synchronous communication.
    2. Identify characteristics and examples of asynchronous communication.
    3. Identify questions to answer when considering new communications technologies.

Completing a complex project successfully requires good communication among team members. If those team members work in
the same building, they can arrange regular meetings, simply stop by each other's office space to get a quick answer, or even
discuss a project informally at other office functions. Many projects are performed by teams that interact primarily through
electronic communication and are, therefore, called virtual teams (Business Dictionary, 2010). To avoid miscommunication that can
harm trust and to include team members in a project culture, the project team needs a plan for communicating reliably and in a
timely manner. This planning begins with understanding two major categories of communication.

Synchronous Communications

If all the parties to the communication are taking part in the exchange at the same time, the communication is synchronous. A
telephone conference call is an example of synchronous communication. When the participants are not interacting at the same time,
the communication is not synchronous, or asynchronous.

The following are examples of synchronous communications:

    Live meeting. Gathering of team members at the same location.
    Audio conference. A telephone call between two individuals or a conference call where several people participate.
    Computer-assisted conference. Audio conference with a connection between computers that can display a document or
    spreadsheet that can be edited by both parties.
    Video conference. Similar to an audio conference but with live images of the participants. Some laptop computers have bui -
    ch06_s01_s01_f01">Figure 6.1 "Video Conferencing by Laptop".

    IM (instant messaging). Exchange of text or voice messages using pop-up windows on the participants' computer screens, as
    shown in Figure 6.2 "Instant Messaging Pop-Up Window".

                                                       Figure 6.2 Instant Messaging Pop-Up Window

Texting. Exchange of text messages that are 160 characters or fewer between mobile phones, pagers, or personal digital
assistants (PDAs)--devices that hold a calendar, a contact list, a task list, and other support programs. See Figure 6.3 "Texting
via Cell Phone".

6.1.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24686
Time Zones

The worldwide communication network makes it possible to assemble project teams from anywhere in the world. Most people
work during daylight hours, which can make synchronous meetings difficult if the participants are in different time zones, where
they start, end, and take meal breaks at different times. It can be an advantage in some circumstances. For example, if something
must be done by the start of business tomorrow, team members in Asia can work on the problem during their normal work hours
while team members in North America get some sleep.

As the earth turns, the sun appears to move across the sky from east to west. Local noon occurs when the sun is at its highest
position in the sky. Cities and countries to the north or south of each other all observe local noon at the same time. For example,
noon in New York occurs at the same time as it does in Bogot, Colombia, in South America. Be aware that many well-educated
people in the United States think of South America as directly south of North America. As you can see in Figure 6.4 "World Time
Zones", most of South America is one or two time zones east of the United States.

To prevent confusion between a.m. and p.m., times are given using a twenty-four-hour clock. Noon is 12:00 and 1 p.m. is 13:00,
and parts of an hour are divided by colons. For example, 13:25:21 is thirteen hours, twenty-five minutes, and twenty-one seconds.

Local Time

Local time is compared to the time zone that is centered at the historically significant naval observatory at Greenwich, England.
The time at that location is Greenwich Mean Time (GMT). More recent references use UT for Universal Time (UT) instead of
GMT.

  Conference Call between New York and Paris

  A project manager in New York is five time zones west of the reference zone, so the time is given as UT -5 (or GMT -5). If it
  is noon in the reference zone, it is 7 a.m. (five hours earlier) in New York. The manager would like to contact a project team
  member in Paris, France. Paris is one time zone west of the reference zone (UT +1 or GMT +1). If it is noon (12:00) in the
  reference zone, it is 13:00 (1 p.m.) in Paris.

This means that there is a six-hour difference between New York and Paris. If the project manager waits until after lunch to place
the call (1 p.m. in New York), it might be too late in the day in Paris (7 p.m.) to reach someone.

Asynchronous Communications

Getting a team together at the same time can be a challenge--especially if they are spread out across time zones. Many types of
communication do not require that the parties are present at the same time. This type of communication is not synchronous; it is
asynchronous. There are several choices of asynchronous communications.

Mail and Package Delivery

Many companies prefer that final contracts are personally signed by an authorized representative of each party to the agreement. If
several signatures are required, this can take weeks to get all the signatures if the contracts are transferred by the postal service. If
this process is holding up the start of the project, you can use an overnight delivery service to minimize the time spent transferring
the documents.

Fax

A telefacsimile (fax) machine is a device that scans a document a narrow band at a time converting it into tones that can be
conveyed over traditional telephone lines to a receiving device that reproduces a facsimile--exact duplicate--of the document. A
fax machine typically has a paper feeder that can be used for feeding multiple-page documents, a telephone key pad and handset,
and a status display, as shown in Figure 6.5 "Fax Machine".

Transmission rates of fax machines are typically limited by the use of traditional telephone lines. The data transmission uses the
same method as a dial-up computer modem. A Group 3 fax machine has a maximum data rate of 14.4 kilobits per second (Kbps),
but if the phone connection is poor, it will drop down to lower speeds automatically until it can establish a reliable connection
between machines.

6.1.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24686
The Group 3 fax machine digitizes data in a form that is compatible with computers and the fax function is often integrated with
other computer functions. A multifunction device, such as the one shown in Figure 6.6 "Multifunction Printer, Scanner, Fax, and
Copier", can scan a document and save it as an image, send it as a fax, or print multiple copies.

Fax machines have been around a long time and enjoy a high level of trust for transmitting documents accurately. In many
countries, a fax of a signed contract is legal, but a computer-scanned image is not.

Electronic Mail

Electronic mail (e-mail) is widely used to coordinate projects and to communicate between team members. It has several valuable
characteristics for project management:

    Copies can be sent to a list of team members.
    A preconference-call e-mail can list the agenda items of the conference call.
    A postconference e-mail can summarize the results of the discussion on each topic.
    Messages can be saved to document the process in case of a misunderstanding or miscommunication.
    Files can be attached and distributed.

Project Log and Web Log (Blog)

A Web log is typically called a blog. It is an online journal that can be private, shared by invitation, or made available to the world.
Some project managers keep a journal in which they summarize the day's challenges and triumphs and the decisions they made.
They return to this journal at a later date to review their decision-making process after the results of those decisions are known to
see if they can learn from their mistakes. Many decisions in project management are made with incomplete knowledge, and
reflecting on previous decisions to develop this decision-making skill is important to growth as a project manager.

Really Simple Syndication (RSS)

Some projects are directly affected by external factors such as political elections, economic trends, corporate mergers,
technological or scientific breakthroughs, or weather. To keep informed about these factors, you can subscribe to online news
sources. A method that facilitates this process is Really Simple Syndication (RSS). To use an RSS feed, team members download a
free news reader on the Internet. Web pages with RSS news feeds have labeled links, as shown in Figure 6.7 "Link to RSS Feed on
a Web Page".

                                                              Figure 6.7 Link to RSS Feed on a Web Page

If the user clicks on the RSS feed, news from the Web site is automatically sent to the user's news reader. The news reader can be
set to filter the news for key words to limit the stories to those that are relevant to the project.

The following are examples of asynchronous communications:

    Mail and package delivery. Transfer of objects and contracts that need signatures.
    Fax. Document transmittal over telephone. Facsimiles are accepted for some documents.
    Electronic mail (e-mail). Text messages with attachments can be distributed and managed by computer programs.
    Web log (blog). An online journal may be used to record events, thoughts, and lessons learned.
    Really Simple Syndication (RSS). News feeds that push relevant content to a reader to keep the manager informed of new events
    that could affect the project.

Assessing New Communication Technologies

New technologies for communicating electronically appear with increasing frequency. Using a new technology that is unfamiliar to
the team increases the technology complexity, which can cause delays and increase costs. To decide if a new technology should be
included in a communications plan, seek answers to the following questions:

    Does the new communication technology provide a competitive advantage for the project by reducing cost, saving time, or
    preventing mistakes?
    Does the project team have the expertise to learn the new technology quickly?

6.1.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24686
    Does the company offer support such as help desk and equipment service for new communication technology?
    What is the cost of training and implementation in terms of time as well as money?

Key Takeaways
    Synchronous communications take place when all the parties are present at the same time. Examples are telephone calls and
    video conferencing.
    Asynchronous communications take place when the parties are not present at the same time. Examples are e-mail, fax, package
    delivery, blogs, and RSS feeds.
    Determine if a new technology can save time, reduce cost, or prevent mistakes and if the increased complexity can be handled
    by the team and support staff for an affordable cost in time and money.

Exercises                                                                                        called  _______________.

 1. Communications methods that do not require both parties to participate at the same time are
 2. A telephone call is an example of __________ communication.
 3. An exchange of e-mail messages is an example of _______________ communication.
 4. A __________ is an online journal used to share an individual's thoughts and experiences.
 5. A video conference is an example of _____________ communications.
 6. What are two examples of synchronous communications technologies that you have used?
 7. What are two examples of asynchronous communications technologies that you have used?
 8. What is a virtual team?
 9. Where is the reference time zone and why is it sometimes referred to as both GMT and UT?
10. Why are fax machines still used for legal documents?

Internalize your learning experience by preparing to discuss the following.

If you were managing a functional team that included people from three other countries, which synchronous communications

technologies would you include in your communications plan and for what purposes? Which asynchronous technologies would you
use and for what purposes? What new technologies would you consider?

References

Business Dictionary, s.v. "Virtual Team," www.businessdictionary.com/definition/virtual-team.html (accessed January 27, 2010).

This page titled 6.1: Types of Communication is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

6.1.4                                                                                            https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24686
6.2: Selecting Software

  Learning Objectives

    1. Identify the types of software that are appropriate for projects of low complexity.
    2. Identify the types of software that are appropriate for projects of medium complexity.
    3. Identify the types of software that are appropriate for projects of high complexity.
    4. Describe strategies for sharing documents that can be edited by a team.

Part of a communications plan is determining the type of computer software that will be used to create documents, spreadsheets,
diagrams, and reports. The choice of software is related to the complexity of the project.

Simple Projects

Basic projects can be managed using some of the features available in general-purpose software that is available in most offices.

Word Processing

Even the most basic project will generate numerous documents using word processing software. A communications plan can
specify standards for these documents that makes it easier to create, edit, combine, store, and retrieve the documents. Document
standards include the following:

    Specifying the file format
    Using templates for commonly used forms

File Format

Word processing software programs display a document on a computer's screen and allow the user to enter and edit text. When the
file is saved to a storage device, the text and all the various formatting such as font and font size are converted to a code for
efficient storage. The code varies from one word processing program to another and even between releases of the same program.

The most common word processing program, by a wide margin, is Microsoft Word (MS Word). Several releases of MS Word run
on the Windows operating system and on the Macintosh operating system. Versions of MS Word released prior to 2007 save files in
a proprietary format. The format is indicated by a period and a three-letter extension--.doc--that is automatically attached to the
file when it is saved. Beginning with MS Word 2007 for Windows and MS Word 2008 for Macintosh, files are saved using a
different format that is indicated by a period and a four-letter extension--.docx--that identify the newer format.

Almost all word processing programs have the ability to save files in the .doc file format, and it is a common standard for word
processing files. Newer versions of word processing programs, including MS Word 2007 and MS Word for Mac 2008, can save
files in the older .doc format. There are new features in MS Word 2007--such as the ability to format citations in a variety of
styles, including APA, MLA, and Chicago--that are lost when the file is saved in the .doc format. Older versions of MS Word can
be adapted to read the newer .docx file formats by downloading and installing a compatibility program that is available at no cost
from Microsoft's Web site. Display of document file extensions is hidden by default in the Windows operating system. They can be
displayed by turning off this feature. Instructions for displaying the file extensions are available from the operating system's help
menu. In the Windows Vista operating system, the option is found on the Control Panel, in Appearance and Personalization, in
Folder Options, on the View tab, under Advanced Settings, as shown in Figure 6.8 "Displaying File Name Extensions".

6.2.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24687
                                                             Figure 6.8 Displaying File Name Extensions

When a list of files is displayed in a dialog box, choose the Details option. In Windows Vista, the Details option is on the View
button, as shown in Figure 6.9 "File Extensions Displayed in Details View".

                                                        Figure 6.9 File Extensions Displayed in Details View

Styles

The combination of formatting, including font, font size, font color, shading, and other attributes used to display a segment of text
and to identify its level of importance, is called a style. A style can be given a name and applied repeatedly to different portions of a
document. Predefined styles are available in MS Word 2007 on the ribbon, on the Home tab, in the Styles group, as shown in
Figure 6.10 "Style Choices". Users can define their own styles and give them names. Some organizations prefer that all of their
documents have similar fonts and styles for headings, body text, and figure captions.

                                                                         Figure 6.10 Style Choices

Outlines

An outline of a document consists of topic headings and subheadings, and it is useful when organizing or reorganizing a document.
The Styles group in MS Word 2007 includes predefined styles for nine levels of headings. In addition to using different fonts, each
heading is assigned a level of importance. A document that uses headings with assigned levels can be viewed in the Outline view,
such as the book outline shown in Figure 6.11 "Outline View in MS Word 2007". In this view, the level of detail displayed in the

6.2.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24687
outline is selected to display the first two levels of the outline. The headings and the hidden text associated with each heading can
be moved by selecting and dragging headings from one location in the outline to another.

                                                              Figure 6.11 Outline View in MS Word 2007

Templates

If a particular type of document will be used repeatedly, it might be worth the time to create an example document--a template--
that is formatted using the appropriate styles with blanks or placeholder text where the user can insert the information that describes
a particular situation. A variety of templates are already available for download at no additional cost. For example, when a new
document is created in Microsoft Word 2007, there is an option to choose a template such as the invoice template shown in Figure
6.12 "Standardized Document Used as a Template".

                                                      Figure 6.12 Standardized Document Used as a Template
The template may be customized and used repeatedly for all the documents of that type, or the organization can design its own.

6.2.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24687
Diagrams

Reporting relationships and the flow of work are often described using diagrams that consist of boxes connected by arrows. Recent
releases of popular word processing programs include drawing tools that can be used for basic diagrams. In MS Word 2007, a
variety of shapes and connectors are available on the Insert tab, in the Illustrations group on the Shapes button, as shown in Figure
6.13 "Menu of Diagramming Shapes and Connectors in Word 2007".

                                            Figure 6.13 Menu of Diagramming Shapes and Connectors in Word 2007

Adaptable connecting lines and arrows can be used that redraw automatically when the shapes are moved. This feature facilitates
rapid revisions when the shapes must be moved, because the connecting arrows do not need to be redrawn.

A feature named SmartArt was introduced in Microsoft Office 2007 that has a variety of charts that can be used for displaying
organization and relationships that use more sophisticated and artistic graphics, as shown in Figure 6.14 "SmartArt Feature in
Microsoft Word".

6.2.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24687
                                                           Figure 6.14 SmartArt Feature in Microsoft Word

Spreadsheets

Another commonly available software creates a spreadsheet--a display of data in row and column format--in which financial or
numerical data can be manipulated. The intersection of the rows and columns are cells into which numbers, text, dates, and
formulas can be entered. The formulas can utilize values found in other cells and display the results in the cell in place of the
formula. If the value in a cell to which the formula refers is changed, all the formulas that use that cell's value are immediately
recalculated. This feature makes it convenient to examine several options quickly. Spreadsheets are often used to manage data on
simple projects instead of a dedicated database or project management software.

Organizing Data in Rows and Columns

If a spreadsheet is used to store data, such as a list of project activities or a list of expenses, it is prudent to arrange the data in some
way that would be used by more sophisticated data management software. Most data management programs arrange data in such a
way that each type of data is represented by a column with a label at the top and each row contains the specific data for one type of
item. A collection of data arranged in rows and columns is a table. For example, a list of expenses would be arranged so that
individual expenses are recorded on each row, and each column would be a type of information related to the expenses, as shown in
Figure 6.15 "Expenses Arranged in a Table in a Spreadsheet".

6.2.5  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24687
                                                     Figure 6.15 Expenses Arranged in a Table in a Spreadsheet

File Format

The most common spreadsheet program, by a wide margin, is Microsoft Excel (MS Excel). There have been several releases of MS
Excel that run on the Windows operating system and on the Macintosh operating system. Versions of MS Excel released prior to
2007 save files in a proprietary format. The format is indicated by a period and a three-letter extension--.xls--that is automatically
attached to the file when it is saved. Beginning with MS Excel 2007 for Windows and MS Excel 2008 for Macintosh, files are
saved using a different format that is indicated by a period and a four-letter extension--.xlsx--that identifies the newer format.

Almost all spreadsheet programs have the ability to save files in the .xls file format, and it is a common standard for spreadsheet
files. Newer versions of spreadsheet programs, including MS Excel 2007 and MS Excel for Mac 2008 can save files in the older
.xls format. There are a few new basic features in MS Excel 2007 that would be lost by saving files to the older file format.

Using a Spreadsheet to Manage Project Data

If the data in the spreadsheet is arranged in simple rows of the same type of data, it can be manipulated to provide reports for basic
projects.

If one or more of the columns in a table contain labels, identification numbers, or other descriptions, those labels can be used to
specify sorting and filtering options. For example, if the spreadsheet has a list of expenses, the rows of data can be sorted in
decreasing or increasing value by one of the data types such as the due date or the amount of the expense. The display can be
restricted--filtered--to display only those rows that meet criteria specified by the user. For example, the table could be filtered to
display the expenses for a particular department that were incurred between two dates. This ability facilitates the preparation of
monthly progress reports and budgets.

In MS Excel 2007, the sorting and filtering options are on the Data tab, in the Sort and Filter group under the Sort or Filter button.
Once a filter is applied, option buttons are placed at the top of each column to facilitate changes in the sorting or filtering options.
For example, the list of expenses shown in the previous figure can be sorted by the labels in the Category column and filtered to
show only costs that are more than $20, as shown in Figure 6.16 "Sorting and Filtering in Microsoft Excel 2007".

6.2.6  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24687
                                                     Figure 6.16 Sorting and Filtering in Microsoft Excel 2007

Subtotals

If the user wants to find a subtotal of the values that belong in a particular group, the groups must be identified by a label in one of
the columns. Finding subtotals is a two-step process. First, the table is sorted by that column to bring all the rows in each group
together. Next, the subtotal feature is applied. In Excel 2007, the subtotal option is found on the Data tab, in the Outline group. A
dialog box allows the user to choose the columns to subtotal and the columns that contain the labels of the groups. A subtotal is
inserted below the last row for each group, as shown in Figure 6.17 "Using Subtotals".

6.2.7  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24687
                                                                       Figure 6.17 Using Subtotals

In a panel at the left of the screen are lines and symbols that indicate the level of detail that is displayed. By clicking on the boxes
with minus signs, the rows containing the data can be hidden, leaving the subtotals or grand total, as shown in Figure 6.18 and
Figure 6.19. This feature allows a manager to view summary data very quickly without the visual clutter of the details.

                                      Figure 6.18

Third level details are hidden.

                                      Figure 6.19

All details in rows 2-16 are hidden.

Graphics for Bar Charts and Milestones

Spreadsheets can be used for basic progress reports that show activities, dates, and horizontal bars that represent the duration of an
activity. A sequence of dates can be created as column labels by entering the first two dates in the sequence, selecting both dates,
and then dragging the fill handle--a small square in the lower right corner of the selected cell, as shown in Figure 6.20 "Creating a
Sequence of Dates"--to extend the pattern.

                                      6.2.8        https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24687
                                                               Figure 6.20 Creating a Sequence of Dates

The program is sophisticated enough to correctly fill date sequences between months that have a different number of days and even
account for leap years in February. Because more sophisticated project management software uses a table design in which the first
two columns are description and duration, a similar structure, in which those two columns are adjacent and in that order will make
it convenient to transfer the list of activities in a low-complexity project into the project management software at a later date if the
spreadsheet is not sufficient. In the duration column, use the following abbreviations:

    d for days
    wk for weeks
    mons for months

The duration of each activity and the relationships between activities can be illustrated using the drawing shapes. In Excel 2007, the
same set of shapes and connector arrows are available as those in Word 2007. A long rectangle can represent a bar whose length
represents the duration of the activity. Events or significant dates in the project are identified with a diamond. The diamond can be
created by using a small square shape and rotating it. Arrows can be drawn between the shapes to indicate their relationships, as
shown in Figure 6.21 "Diagram of Activities". Unfortunately, the arrows in Excel 2007 connect to handles on the sides of the
rotated squares instead of the corners. This detail may be overlooked in a simple project diagram.

                                                                    Figure 6.21 Diagram of Activities
This type of diagram is useful for projects with low complexity where a simple chart of a few activities will suffice.

Software for Moderately Complex Projects

More complex projects involve more people who are often separated geographically and who contribute to the same documents.
Complex projects have more tasks with more complex relationships. To manage those tasks and relationships, using dedicated
project management software and more sophisticated diagramming software is justified.

Sharing Team Documents

If more than one person on a team will be contributing to a document, the document must be accessible to them. To manage
documents that are created by a team, it is necessary to control the edits so that work is not lost or confused.

6.2.9  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24687
Version Control

Files such as word processing documents and spreadsheets may be stored on an individual's computer and copies sent to
participants who then make changes and return the revised version to the person who is responsible for the final version of the
document. If more than one person is editing his or her own copy of a document at the same time, different versions of the
document with different additions or corrections are created. Word processing programs such as MS Word 2007 have a feature that
can compare two documents and identify the differences to help bring the two different documents back together. This feature is
found on the Review tab, in the Compare group, as shown in Figure 6.22 "Compare Documents Feature".

                                                               Figure 6.22 Compare Documents Feature

Most software programs make periodic backups to protect from accidental power loss. One of the ways that a user can still lose a
lot of work is by replacing a newer version of a document with an older version. It is possible to display the date on which the file
was last saved using the Details view. If more than one version of the file exists in two different locations, the dates can be
compared to determine which is the most recent. These techniques are useful for simple projects with very few participants.

File Storage and Access Control

Managing versions of documents that are edited by more than one person can be done more effectively by placing the file in a
location that can be accessed by all the team members. This can be a shared drive on the company's computer or on a document
sharing service. People who need to use the document are grouped by their need for access. Three groupings are common:

 1. View only
 2. Edit only
 3. Ownership/administrator

The owner or administrator of the document can set the access levels. These levels of access can be assigned to each individual, or
they can be assigned to named groups and the person can be made a member of a group. The owner of the document can choose to
accept or reject changes made by those with edit-only permission.

The advantage of this method is that there is only one version of the file. If a file is being edited, it is usually locked so that other
team members may view the file but cannot edit it until the first editor closes the file.

If the file is stored on a computer that is on a secure network within an organization, it can be difficult for team members who do
not have direct connections to the company's network to get access to the files. To protect the security of the company's network,
the network administrator can grant an outside user permission to access the network from anywhere on the Internet using a virtual
private network (VPN) connection. A VPN uses encryption--replacing readable content with a code--to protect the
communication between the network and the user to make it secure. The VPN connection gets the user onto the company network
as if they were directly connected, but they still need the appropriate passwords to access the shared documents.

Tracking Changes and Adding Comments

One of the features that is particularly useful for keeping track of the changes made to a document by several users is called Track
Changes. In Microsoft Word 2007, it is found on the Review tab, in the Tracking group. Changes may be shown in the document or
in balloons at the side.

If a team member wishes to explain a change, it is very important that they do not insert their explanation as text into the document.
Such explanations might not be deleted and would end up in the final version of the document with potentially damaging results.
Instead, team members can use a form of electronic sticky note to make comments. This feature is found in MS Word 2007 on the

6.2.10  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24687
Review tab, in the Comments group. A change and a comment are shown in Figure 6.23 "Tracking Changes and Adding
Comments". The document owner must go through the document and accept or reject each change and delete all the comments
before the document is released as a finished product. The Next, Accept, and Reject options are found in Microsoft Word 2007 on
the Review tab, in the Changes group.

                                                        Figure 6.23 Tracking Changes and Adding Comments

Diagramming Software

The processes and relationships in medium- and high-complexity projects usually require more sophisticated software tools for
creating reporting diagrams and workflow charts. The market for diagramming software is more diverse than for word processing
and spreadsheets, and it is not as likely that most team members will have the same programs that save files in the same formats.
Microsoft Viseo 2007 is available as a stand-alone program that sells for several hundred dollars. For medium-complexity projects,
a free alternative to Viseo is Open Office Draw. Open Office is a free software alternative that includes a word processing,
spreadsheet, presentation, and drawing programs. The Open Office Draw program, and others like it, can create diagrams such as
the one shown in Figure 6.24 "Diagram Created Using Open Office Draw".

6.2.11  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24687
                                                       Figure 6.24 Diagram Created Using Open Office Draw

The files created by the various drawing programs might not be compatible with each other, but all the programs can create static
image files that can be pasted into word processing documents.

Project Management Software

The relationships between project activities can become complicated in medium- and high-complexity projects. Dedicated project
management software can compute the sum of activity durations along several different paths through complex relationships and
recalculate them immediately if any of the durations or starting times are changed. Similarly, charts and reports are updated
automatically based on the new data. The most popular software for medium-complexity projects is Microsoft Project. If a project
manager begins work on the project in the belief that it can be managed using a list of activities in a word processing program or in
a spreadsheet, the list of activities and their durations can be copied and pasted, or imported, into the project management
software's table of activities, if the original document or spreadsheet was designed with that possibility in mind, as shown in Figure
6.25 "List of Activities Transferred to a Project Management Program".

6.2.12  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24687
                                          Figure 6.25 List of Activities Transferred to a Project Management Program

Once the data are placed in the project management software, the relationships can be defined and reports created. Organizations on
a tight budget might consider using an open source program named OpenProject. Open source software is usually available at no
cost for individual users and with fewer restrictions than proprietary software like Microsoft Project. OpenProject is similar to
Microsoft Project, as shown in Figure 6.26 "Open Source Project Management Software", and could be used on low- and medium-
complexity projects that do not need the more advanced features available in Microsoft Project.

                                                      Figure 6.26 Open Source Project Management Software

Software for Complex Projects

Complex projects can involve thousands of individual activities and a company might have several projects going at the same time.
Large, complex projects are common in the construction industry. A software that is commonly used for complex projects in
construction is P3 or P6 from Primavera. It has the ability to produce sophisticated reports that help project managers to anticipate
problems and make projections.

Word processing documents often contain data that could be aggregated and analyzed. Beginning with Microsoft Word 2007 and
the .docx file format, it is possible to insert characters called tags on either side of a particular section of a form or document and
assign a data label. For example, the name of the supplier on an invoice could be enclosed between two tags: <supplier>Thompson
Hardware</supplier>. These tags resemble those used in the hypertext markup language (HTML) to identify how to display text on
a Web page, but instead of telling a Web browser how to display the name of the supplier, it identifies Thompson Hardware as the
supplier. These tags are can be created by following a set of rules called the extensible markup language (XML). Forms created
using XML can be scanned for the content that is marked by tags. The data can be imported into a spreadsheet or database for
analysis. Creating documents that use XML to identify data in the forms can be done using Microsoft InfoPath. An example that
identifies key facts in a document that was prepared using InfoPath is shown in Figure 6.27 "InfoPath Form with XML Tags".
Because it takes extra effort to learn to use InfoPath, or a similar XML authoring program, and to create the forms, this approach is
normally limited to complex and sophisticated organizations that have the need to manage large amounts of data.

6.2.13  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24687
                                                              Figure 6.27 InfoPath Form with XML Tags

Key Takeaways
    Low-complexity projects might be managed using general purpose word processing and spreadsheet software by using the
    special features for outlining, managing data, and inserting graphic objects
    Medium-complexity projects need special purpose software for managing project activities, such as Microsoft Project, and
    graphic software such as VISEO. Open source software such as OpenProject and Open Office Draw may suffice.
    High-complexity projects need more sophisticated project management software like P6 from Primavera. Forms can be created
    using XML tags that allow data to be extracted from the documents.
    Files can be stored at a location that is accessible by all the team members. They can be granted different levels of access,
    including view only, edit only, and ownership. Features like track changes and compare documents can help manage edits.

Exercises

 1. General purpose word processing and spreadsheet software might be sufficient for managing _____ (low-, medium-, high-)
    complexity projects.

 2. Three features that are available in spreadsheet programs such as Microsoft Excel to manage tables of data are subtotal, sort,
    and _________.

 3. If outline levels are assigned in a word processing document, the outline may be _________ or expanded to hide or display
    different levels of detail.

 4. ______-________ (two words) software is often available at no cost, and its use is less restricted than proprietary software.
 5. A VPN connection uses ___________ to protect the content of the communication.
 6. How are XML tags similar to HTML tags and how are they different?
 7. How should activity information be organized in a spreadsheet to make it easier to transfer to a project management program?
 8. What are three options for creating a diagram that displays a project's reporting hierarchy for low- or medium-complexity

    projects?
 9. What is an example of a software product that is commonly used for highly complex projects?
10. What are three levels of file access and editing permissions that can be assigned, and what are examples of user groups that

    would be assigned to each level?

Internalize your learning experience by preparing to discuss the following.

Describe an experience you might have had with editing the same word processing document and how you managed the revisions.
If you used some of the features described above, how well did they work? What features were described that might have been

6.2.14  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24687
helpful?

This page titled 6.2: Selecting Software is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

6.2.15  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24687
6.3: Exercises

Exercises at the end of the chapter are designed to strengthen your understanding and retention of the information recently acquired
in the chapter.

Essay Questions

Write several paragraphs to provide more in-depth analysis and consideration when answering the following questions.

 1. Assume that you are the leader of a virtual team that includes members who are in New York, Bogot, Honolulu, and Tokyo.
    You would like to choose a day and time for a weekly conference call to keep the project on track. Choose a day and time and
    explain your choice and the compromises and problems it might cause for each member. Use the term "synchronous" correctly
    and identify the specific time zone for each participant.

 2. From the list of available templates in your word processing or spreadsheet software, choose a template and describe it. Fill it
    out and then describe how it could be modified to meet the needs of a particular situation or organization.

Discussion

The exercises in this section are designed to promote exchange of information among students in the classroom or in an online
discussion. The exercises are more open ended, which means that what you find might be completely different from what your
classmates find, and you can all benefit by sharing what you have learned.

 1. Consider the newer synchronous and asynchronous communications technologies with which you are familiar. Describe how
    they might be used on projects in new and innovative ways. Relate these ideas to what you learned about project cultures--
    specifically about innovation on projects--and describe how the new communications technologies could be used to innovate.

 2. Describe your experience using Excel to manage data such as lists of purchases. Discuss how the features of sorting, filtering,
    and subtotaling could help answer questions about that list.

This page titled 6.3: Exercises is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

6.3.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24688
6.4: Web Exercise

  Learning Objectives

    1. Determine the local time for team members in other time zones given GMT or UT zone designations.

Using an Online Time Zone Map

Fortunately, there are several websites that provide the information you need to schedule a conference call so that all the
participants know the correct time and day of the week regardless of where they are in the world.

How to Use a Website to Help Find Local Time

 1. Open a word processing document. Save it as Ch06TZStudentName.doc. Use the .doc file format.
 2. On the first line, type Chapter 6 study documentation by and then type your name. Press Enter to move the insertion point to the

    next line
 3. Open a web browser and go to http://www.worldtimezone.com.
 4. The map will display the world's time zones at the time you visit the site. See Figure 6.28 "World Times Compared to 6:40 p.m.

    EST". The example in Figure 6.28 "World Times Compared to 6:40 p.m. EST" was displayed on the author's computer at 6:40
    p.m. EST on Thursday, December 18 (23:40 GMT).

                                                         Figure 6.28 World Times Compared to 6:40 p.m. EST

5. Capture the screen that displays the World Time Zone Map with your current time and date.
6. Switch to the word processing document and paste the screen capture below the first line of text.
7. Below the image, type The time and date in India would be and then type the time and date in India for your current time and

   date.
8. Review your work and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

Element                       Best                             Adequate                       Poor

File name                     Ch06TZStudentName.doc                   Ch06TZStudentName.docx  Different file name or
                                                                                              incompatible format

Determine the local time for  Title; screen capture with              Same as Best            Incomplete or an error in the
team members in other time    current date and time;                                          time or date
zones given GMT or UT zone    correctly calculated day and
designations                  time in India.

9. Save the file and submit it as directed by the instructor.

                                                               6.4.1                          https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24689
This page titled 6.4: Web Exercise is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

6.4.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24689
6.5: Software and Technology Exercises

  Learning Objectives
    1. Locate the dialing codes for making international telephone calls.
    2. Identify dialing techniques used with cell phones to make international telephone calls.
    3. Select the appropriate times and methods for making international calls.
    4. Subscribe to a news service using a newsreader and RSS.

Placing International Calls

International Telephone Calls Using Wired Phones

The telephone may be used for two-person synchronous communication or in a multipart conference call. Using a telephone to
make long-distance and international calls involves using international telephone numbering conventions.

Calls within North America and the Caribbean

The telephone companies in North America use the North American numbering plan (NANP) that includes the United States, its
territories, Canada, Bermuda, and sixteen Caribbean nations.

6.5.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24690
                                                                   Figure 6.29 Rotary Dial Telephone

Erica Hargreave - Dialed in - CC BY-NC 2.0.

Wired telephones are connected physically to a local switch that can handle up to ten thousand connections represented by the last
four-digit numbers in a telephone number from 0000 to 9999. Each switch is identified by a three-digit number such as 555. A local
telephone number consists of the switch number and one of the ten thousand four-digit numbers such as 555 0112. This system can
provide up to ten million different unique phone numbers,[1]
but it does not have the capacity to provide service to billions of people.

The switches are grouped into areas and assigned a group number or area code. Area codes in North America were assigned at a
time when numbers were converted to a sequence of electrical pulses by inserting your finger in a rotary disc--the dial--and
pulling it to a stop on a phone like the one shown in Figure 6.29 "Rotary Dial Telephone".

As a spring returns the dial to its original position, it opens and closes a set of electrical contacts to create a series of pulses that
match the number dialed. Because it takes longer to dial higher numbers like 8 or 9, area codes that could be dialed quickly like
212 and 213 were assigned to densely populated areas like Manhattan (212) and Los Angeles (213). Higher numbers were assigned
to rural areas or to newer areas. As a result, it is difficult to determine where a telephone is located by its area code. Do not assume

6.5.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24690
that numbers with similar area codes in North America are located in the same time zone--they may be thousands of miles apart.
To initiate a call to a different area code, the number 1 is dialed first. This is the national direct dialing (NDD) code for NANP
members.

Calling from North America to a Country outside the NANP

  The IDD code for the United States is 011.

To make an international call from an NANP member such as the United States to another country, you need to provide two codes:
the international direct dialing (IDD) code and the country code. The IDD code for the United States is 011. For example, if you
wanted to place a call to a number in Rio de Janeiro, you would enter 011 55 21 xxx xxxx, where 011 is the IDD code for the
United States, 55 is the country code for Brazil, 21 is the area code for Rio de Janeiro, and xxx xxxx represents the final seven
digits of the number.

Calling to North America from a Country outside the NANP

  The IDD and the country code are not simply reversible. The country code for the United States is 1 (not 011).

If you traveled to Rio de Janeiro for a meeting and wanted to call back to a number in the United States from a local phone, you
would have to look up the IDD code for the local service provider in Brazil. In Brazil, there is a different code for each of the five
phone companies. The IDD for Brasil Telecom is 0014.

The IDD and the country code are not simply reversible. The country code for the United States is 1 (not 011), so you would enter
0014 1 xxx xxx xxxx, where the last ten digits are the area code and telephone number in the United States.

Reading the Phone Number on a Business Card in North America

It is commonly understood in the United States that you do not enter the hyphens, parentheses, spaces, or periods that are used to
make a telephone number more readable and that you dial 1 first--even though it is not included--for a call destined for a different
area code. For example, if the phone number on the business card shows (555) 222-1111, you know that you would enter 2221111
if you are calling from within the 555 area code[2]
or 15552221111 for a call from a different area code, but you would not attempt to enter the parentheses, space, or hyphen. Spaces
are used in some instances in the following discussion to make the numbers easier to read in this text, but it will be understood that
they are not entered when dialing the number.

Reading the Phone Number on an International Business Card

Unlike those countries participating in the NANP, other countries use different numbers for the national direct dialing (NDD) code
and the country code. They might use a different number of digits for the area or city code. A business card from a team member in
Rio de Janeiro might be +55 (0)21-xxxx xxxx where 55 is the country code and 0 is the NDD code. To call this team member from
the United States on a wired telephone, you would enter 011 55 21 xxxx xxxx, where 011 is the IDD for the United States, 55 is the
country code for Brazil, and 21 is the code for Rio de Janeiro.

Notice the zero between 55 and 21 is not included when calling from outside the country. This is the NDD code that is used for
calls between areas within the country. For example, if you land in the airport at Sao Paulo, Brazil, and want to call the person in
Rio de Janeiro from a local phone, you would enter 0 21 xxxx xxxx (without the spaces) where 0 is the NDD code--like 1 in the
United States--and 21 is the area/city code.

Finding International Telephone Codes

 1. Open a word processing document. Save it as Ch06PhoneStudentName.doc. Use the .doc file format.
 2. On the first line, type Chapter 6 study documentation by and then type your name. Press Enter to move the insertion point to the

    next line
 3. Open a web browser and go to http://www.kropla.com. This site provides information on international dialing codes.
 4. Near the middle of the page, click the International Dialing Codes link.

6.5.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24690
5. On the CountryCode.org page, in the Country column, scroll down and click Brazil. A list of country codes and city codes is
   displayed next to a map of the country.

6. Use the browser's Back button to return to the CountryCode.org web page. Add the address for this page to the Project
   Management folder in your browser's favorites or bookmarks.

7. Switch back to the browser. In the Country column, scroll down and click one of the country names other than Brazil.
8. Capture the screen that shows the country's code and map, paste it into a blank document, and then save the document as

   Ch06Exercises6.5.doc.

Making International Telephone Calls Using a Mobile Phone

To place an international call to a country outside the NANP using a mobile phone, you use the plus sign (+) instead of the IDD
code. For example, the number of the British Museum is +44 (0) 20 7323 8000. To call this number from a wired phone in the
United States, you would dial 011 44 20 7323 8000. If you make the call from a mobile phone, you dial +44 20 7323 8000. Notice
the plus sign takes the place of the IDD code.

Finding the Plus Sign on a Mobile Phone

Wired phones do not have a plus sign on their keypads, but recent model mobile phones include a method to dial a plus sign.
Unfortunately, the method varies by brand of telephone.

International Telephone Calls Using a Mobile Phone

 1. Open a web browser and go to http://www.howtocallinternationally.com. This site has a step-by-step demonstration of how to
    make calls using wired and mobile phones.

 2. At the right of the page under Shortcuts, click From a mobile (cellphone). The How to call internationally from a mobile
    (cellular) telephone page displays. Read this page.

 3. Scroll down to the video and click the play button.
 4. During the video, when a telephone number with a plus sign is displayed on the cell phone, pause the video and capture the

    screen.
 5. Paste the screen into Ch06PhoneStudentName.doc.
 6. Switch back to the browser window and then watch the rest of the video.
 7. Add a link to this web page in your browser's favorites or bookmarks.
 8. Capture a screen that shows the links to CountryCode.org and Howtocallinternationally.com in the Project Management folder

    in your browser's favorites or bookmarks and then paste it into the Ch06PhoneStudentName.doc.

Element                         Best                             Adequate           Poor

File name                       Ch06PhoneStudentName.doc Ch06PhoneStudentName.docx Different file name or incompatible format

Choose the correct dialing      Title; screen capture showing         Same as Best  Incomplete or used Brazil
codes for making international  the country code and map of
telephone calls                 one of the countries other than
                                Brazil

Identify dialing techniques     A screen capture from the             Same as Best  Cell phone screen capture does
used with cell phones to make   video on how to enter a plus                        not show a plus sign or shows
international telephone calls   sign on a cell phone; a screen                      only one of the two required
                                capture that shows the links to                     sites in the bookmarks folder
                                CountryCode.org and
                                Howtocallinternationally.com
                                in the Project Management
                                folder in the favorites or
                                bookmarks

9. Save the file and submit it as directed by the instructor.

                                                               6.5.4                https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24690
Practice Using International Dialing Codes

Selecting the appropriate numbers to use from a business card for placing an international call requires practice. In this exercise,
you practice using your knowledge of international calling codes to compare your answers to reference answers that are hidden on
a spreadsheet.

Using a Spreadsheet for Practice

 1. Navigate to the location where the student files for chapter exercises are located and then open 6.3.3_PhonePractice.xls. Save
    the file as Ch06PhonePracticeStudentName.xls using the Excel 2003 file format.

 2. Use the skills you practiced in this chapter and in previous exercises to answer the first question in cell C2. You are allowed to
    open a browser and refer to websites for assistance.

 3. Notice that if you type and enter the correct answer, in exactly the format indicated, the cell background turns green, as shown
    in Figure 6.30 "Background Turns Green If Correct".

 4. Observe that column D is hidden. It contains a set of correct answers. The spreadsheet's conditional formatting feature is used
    to change the background color if the cell content matches the hidden answer.

 5. Use your web references and personal knowledge to answer the remaining questions. Place the answers in column C. If some of
    the answers do not turn green, check your work. If you cannot determine the error, move on to the next question. Answer all the
    questions, even if some of the answers are wrong or do not match the reference answer exactly.

 6. Select columns C through E. To accomplish this, you may click and drag the column headings from C through E, or you can
    click the column C heading, hold the Shift key, and click the column E heading. Columns C, D, and E are selected, even though
    column D is hidden, as shown in Figure 6.31 "Columns C, D, and E Selected".

 7. Move the pointer onto either column, then right-click. On the shortcut menu, click Unhide. The answers in column D are
    displayed.

 8. Locate any answers that are still displayed in red. Compare your answer to the reference answer. In the Analysis column on the
    same row, analyze and explain why your answer did not match the reference answer. Use this opportunity to correct
    misunderstandings.

 9. Save the spreadsheet. Check your work to assure that it is complete using the following table:

Element                       Best                        Adequate                           Poor

File name                     Ch06PhonePracticeStudentNa         Ch06PhonePracticeStudentNa  Different file name or
                              me.xls                             me.xlsx                     incompatible format

Select the appropriate times  All incorrect answers are          All correct                 Analysis does not correctly
and methods for making        analyzed; the cause of the                                     identify the cause of the error
international calls           error correctly identified

10. Save the file and submit it as directed by the instructor.

Using a Newsreader

Some projects are directly affected by external factors such as political elections, economic trends, corporate mergers,
technological or scientific breakthroughs, or weather. To keep informed about these factors, you can subscribe to online news
sources. A method that facilitates this process is Really Simple Syndication (RSS). To use this service, you need a newsreader so
you can subscribe to RSS feeds. For this activity, you need a Google account. If you do not have one, go to Google.com and create
one for no cost.

 1. The three-digit area code plus the next four digits make up a seven-digit number. A seven-digit number has ten million possible
    combinations from 000 0000 to 999 9999. In practice, some area codes are reserved for special purposes such as trouble-
    shooting, emergencies, directory assistance, and maintenance, so the maximum is less than ten million per area code. For
    example, numbers 555-0100 through 555-0199 are reserved for fictional use and are not assigned to real customers. 

 2. Some area codes cover large geographic areas, and the NDD code is required to dial a number from within the same area code if
    they are far apart. 

                                                          6.5.5                              https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24690
This page titled 6.5: Software and Technology Exercises is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

6.5.6  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24690
CHAPTER OVERVIEW

7: Starting a Project

  7.1: Project Selection
  7.2: Project Scope
  7.3: Project Start-Up
  7.4: Alignment Process
  7.5: Communications Planning
  7.6: Exercises
  7.7: Software and Technology Exercise
This page titled 7: Starting a Project is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                                                                              1
7.1: Project Selection

  Learning Objectives

    1. Describe the difference between an organization's mission, goals, and objectives.
    2. Describe how the missions are different depending on the type of organization.
    3. Define economic terms used for choosing projects.
    4. Define a project champion and his or her role.
    5. Describe the influences of funding, timing, and unofficial considerations on project selection.

Projects are chosen for a variety of reasons and not all of them are apparent. The project manager must understand why a project
was selected over other choices so that he or she can align the team toward justifying the choice that has been made by senior
management.

Mission of the Organization

The mission of an organization is a statement of why it exists. For example, a police department might have its mission stated on
the door of each patrol car--to protect and serve. A well-written mission statement is short and has the following sections:

    Purpose of the organization
    Primary stakeholders
    Responsibility of the organization toward the stakeholders
    Products or services offered

  Police Department Mission Statement

  The mission of the Philadelphia Police Department is to fight crime and the fear of crime, including terrorism, by working with
  our partners to enforce the laws, apprehend offenders, prevent crime from occurring, and improve the quality of life for all
  Philadelphians (Philadelphia Police Department, 2009).

The missions of organizations can be categorized as profit, not for profit, and government. A business that is created to make a
profit for its owners and stock holders must consider the cost of each project and how much profit it is likely to generate. The
mission statement of a not-for-profit organization like a charity would emphasize the service it provides. A not-for-profit
organization must control its costs so that it does not exceed its funding, and it is always seeking funding and is in competition with
other not-for-profit organizations for funding from the same sources. A government agency, like a police department, is similar to a
not-for-profit organization, but its sources of funding are usually taxes and fees. Its mission would include its responsibilities to the
citizens it represents. Government organizations compete for funding from higher levels of government. Projects are more likely to
be funded if the proposal for the project is closely aligned with the mission of the organization. The project manager must be aware
of that mission while building a team and aligning it behind the purpose of the project.

Goals and Objectives

Senior administrators of the organization decide on how to achieve the mission of the organization by choosing goals. For example,
the director of a not-for-profit preschool that provides low-cost education for children of poor, single parents might set a goal of
improving its reputation for quality. A goal is an end toward which effort is directed. The director meets with her staff and they
consider several ways of achieving that goal. They decide to seek certification by a nationally known group that evaluates the
quality of preschool programs. Obtaining this certification is an objective.

7.1.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24691
                          Figure 7.1 Relationships between Mission, Goals, and Objectives

In this text, we distinguish between the terms goals and objectives. An objective must have a measurable outcome. In this example,
it is easy to measure whether or not the organization receives the certification, which is the distinguishing characteristic of an
objective. The use of these terms is not standardized across the industry or in business, but we will be consistent within this text. To
determine whether a statement is a goal or an objective, simply ask if there is a measurable outcome. Seeking the certification is an
objective that can be met by treating it as a project that has a measurable outcome and a limited time frame.

Economic Selection Criteria

If an organization's mission is to make money, it will try to maximize the profits of the company by increasing the money coming
in or decreasing the money going out. The flow of money is called cash flow. Money coming in is positive cash flow, and money
going out is negative. The company can maximize profits by improving its operational efficiency or by executing projects. The
company must raise money to fund projects. Companies can raise money in three ways:

 1. Borrow it (government organizations, such as cities and schools, can sell bonds, which is a form of borrowing).
 2. Fund the project from existing earnings.
 3. Sell additional stock or ownership shares in the company.

7.1.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24691
If a company borrows money, it must pay back a portion of the amount it borrowed plus additional interest. The interest is a
percentage of the amount of the loan that has not been repaid. The repayment of the loan and interest is usually paid quarterly or
annually. To qualify for selection, a project that is intended to make or save money must be able to do the following:

    Repay loans if money must be borrowed to fund the project
    Increase future earnings for shareholders
    Make the company stock more valuable

When senior managers at a for-profit company decide which projects to fund, they must consider these economic issues.

Simple Payback

To help managers choose between projects, they can use an unsophisticated measurement called simple payback. If the purpose of
the project is to improve cash flow--make it more positive or less negative--the improved positive cash flow each year is applied
to the original cost (negative cash flow) of the project to determine how many years it would take to pay back the original cost. It is
assumed that after that date, the improved cash flow could be used for other purposes or paid out to owners. For example, if the
company borrows $100,000 to fund the project and the project increases cash flow by $20,000 a year, the simple payback would be
five years, as shown in Figure 7.3 "Simple Payback".

Figure 7.3 Simple Payback

Year           0           1          2          3          4          5        6
               $(100,000)
Expense                    $20,000    $20,000    $20,000    $20,000    $20,000  $20,000
               $(100,000)  $20,000    $20,000    $20,000    $20,000    $20,000  $20,000
Income/Saving  $(100,000)  $(80,000)  $(60,000)  $(40,000)  $(20,000)  $ --     $20,000
s

Annual Cash
Flow

Cumulative
Cash Flow

Companies can use simple payback to establish a cutoff for project consideration. For example, management could declare that
no projects will be considered that have a payback of more than three years. For projects that meet this criterion, projects with
shorter simple payback periods would have an advantage in the selection process. Not-for-profit or government organizations
are likely to approve projects with longer simple payback periods because they are not compared to other not-for-profit or
government agencies based on their profitability.

Internal Rate of Return

Companies whose mission is to make a profit are usually trying to make more profit than their competitors. Simply paying back
the loan is not sufficient. If the project involves buying and installing equipment to make a profit, executives can use another
method called internal rate of return (IRR). The IRR is like an internal interest rate that can be used to compare the profitability
of competing projects. To calculate an IRR, the company considers the cash flow each year for the expected life of the product
of the project. It assumes that some of the annual cash flows will be negative and that they can vary from year to year due to
other factors, such as lost production during changeover, periodic maintenance, and sale of used equipment. For example, a
company decides to upgrade a manufacturing line with new equipment based on new technology. They know that the initial
cash flow--shown in year zero--will be negative due to the expense of the conversion. They know that the new equipment has
an expected life of six years before newer technologies make it out of date, at which time they can sell it for a certain salvage
value. The inputs to the IRR calculation are the net cash flow for each year where at least one of them is negative and at least
one of them is positive. The result is a percentage that indicates how well this project performs as an investment. Refer to
Figure 7.5.

Figure 7.5

                                                 7.1.3                 https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24691
Year           0           1        2        3               4        5        6

Equipment      $(100,000)                                                      $10,000
Cost,
Maintenance,
Salvage

Income/Savin               $20,000  $20,000         $20,000  $20,000  $20,000  $20,000
gs

Annual Cash    $(100,000)  $20,000  $20,000         $20,000  $20,000  $20,000  $30,000
Flow

Cumulative Cash Flow $(100,000) $(80,000) $(60,000) $(40,000) $(20,000) $ --   $30,000

Internal Rate

of Return      8%

(IRR)

The life of the equipment is part of the IRR calculation. If a project manager knows that senior management intends to sell the
equipment in six years, team members can be made aware of that decision if it affects their choices.

Other Selection Criteria

Besides making money, there are many other reasons for a project to be selected, including the following:

    Keeping up with competitors
    Meeting legal requirements, such as safety or environmental protection
    Improving the organization's public image

The timing of the project can be very important. A project might be selected at a particular time of year for some of the
following reasons:

    Accumulating a year-end budget surplus
    Increasing executive bonus for the year or quarter
    Funding or certification review deadline

If the project manager must make changes to the schedule at some point in the project that could affect its completion date, it is
valuable to know if the project was selected because of timing.

Project Champions and Opponents

In addition to knowing why a project was selected, it is valuable to know which senior executives supported or opposed the
selection of the project and if the project manager's supervisor was in favor of it or not. Because most project teams consist of
people who do not report to the project manager but who report to other unit managers, they might not be available when you
need them if their boss thinks other projects are more important. If a particular executive proposed the project and actively
advocated for its approval, that person could be a source of support if the project runs into trouble and needs additional
resources. A project champion, sometimes called an executive sponsor, is an influential person who is willing to use his or her
influence to help the project succeed.

To identify the advocates and opponents of the project, begin by reading public documents (if available), such as the minutes of
the meeting at which the project was approved. Next, the project manager can use his or her unofficial network of trusted
colleagues to get their opinions. Those discussions should be informal and off the record. Those opinions might be inaccurate,
but it is valuable to know what misunderstandings exist about a project. If executives in an organization are assigned as project
sponsors, the project champion might be a different person.

                                             7.1.4                    https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24691
  Project Champions Support an Aircraft Project

  When Vought Aircraft won a contract with Boeing to build a significant portion of the fuselage for the new 787 Dreamliner
  in Charleston, South Carolina, there was no existing workforce with aircraft experience. To give Vought Aircraft an
  incentive to locate the plant in South Carolina, Governor Mark Sanford, with the support of the legislature, committed to
  the recruitment and training of the workforce needed for the plant to be successful. The legislature provided several million
  dollars and assigned the role of developing a trained workforce to the South Carolina Technical College System and Trident
  Technical College, the local community college in Charleston, South Carolina.
Dr. Jim Hudgins, president of South Carolina's Technical College System, assigned the most experienced project manager to the
project and personally accepted the role of project sponsor. Dr. Hudgins and Dr. Thornley, president of Trident Technical
College, met with the project leadership at least monthly to review project plans and progress. Each month both Dr. Hudgins
and Dr. Thornley assigned resources and removed barriers to project success. Dr. Thornley assigned procurement personnel to
the project to assure materials were purchased and delivered in time to support the project schedule. She reallocated space to
provide training laboratories for the project and assigned a college leader to the project full-time to coordinate actions with the
college. Dr. Hudgins coordinated with the Governor's office to assure the project received the appropriate level of support. Both
Dr. Hudgins and Dr. Thornley had the political power and the resources to assure the project had the autonomy and the
resources to succeed. The project met every milestone, exceeded every measurable goal, and received high praise from Vought
Management as the plant began operations on schedule.

Key Takeaways
    A mission statement declares the purpose of the organization and identifies the primary stakeholders, the products or
    services offered, and the responsibility toward the stakeholders. Goals are statements of direction for the organization, and
    objectives are activities that achieve those goals with measurable outcomes.
    Profit-making organizations exist to make profits for their owners while in competition with other companies. The goals of
    those companies are directed at making as much or more money than the competition. Not-for-profit organizations are
    directed at providing a service to a particular group. They must control costs to perform their tasks with the funds they have,
    and they compete with other not-for-profit organizations for donations and funding. A government agency is similar to a not-
    for-profit organization, but its sources of funding are usually taxes, fees, and funding from a higher level of government, and
    it has a responsibility to the citizens it represents. Government organizations must justify their expenditure of tax money to
    elected or appointed officials.
    Two economic tools for evaluating and comparing projects are simple payback and internal rate of return. Simple payback is
    a calculation of the year when the cumulative income or savings due to spending money on a project will meet or exceed the
    original cost of the project. Internal rate of return is a calculation of the average percentage of increased cash flow over the
    life of the project's product.
    A project champion is an influential person who is willing to use his or her influence to help the project succeed. It is useful
    to know why the project champion wants the project to succeed and to be sure to accomplish that goal even if it is not stated.
    Project selection depends on the availability of funds, which depends on the way each type of organization receives money
    for projects. Funds might be available at certain times and projects are selected that can take advantage of that opportunity.
    Projects might be initiated for reasons that are not stated, and investigating the source of funding and likely motivation of
    project champions can provide better understanding of the project's chances for success.

Exercises

 1. An end toward which effort is directed that has measurable outcomes is an __________ in this text.
 2. A general statement of the direction an organization should take is a ______.
 3. If a company has to make quarterly loan payments to the bank, this is an example of a negative _______ ______ (two

    words).
 4. If you borrow $1,000 and have to pay back $1,010 a month later, the $10 dollars is the _______.
 5. If a company had to choose between installing two different pieces of expensive equipment that had different expected

    lifetimes, different salvage values, and different production capabilities, it would compare the _______ _____ __ ________
    (four words) for each option

7.1.5  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24691
     6. On Google's Web pages, it says that they want to "organize the world's information and make it universally accessible and
        useful." This is an example of a _______ statement.

     7. An influential person who is in favor of a project is one of the project ________.
     8. If upgrading the windows in a building costs $100,000 and it reduces heating and cooling costs by $5,000 a year, the

        investment in the window upgrade has a _____ ______ (two words) of twenty years.
     9. The group that determines the need for a project is the ________ organization.
   10. What are four parts of a well-written mission statement?
    11. What is the primary mission of each of the following types of organizations: profit-making, not-for-profit, and government

        organizations?
   12. What does it mean if the money spent on a project has a simple payback of five years?
   13. Why is it important to identify project champions?
   14. What is an example of funding for a project that is only available for a short period of time under special circumstances?

    Internalize your learning experience by preparing to discuss the following.

        Choose an example from outside the assigned reading of a mission, goal, and objective that demonstrates the characteristics
        of each and how they relate to each other. The example can be from a real organization or it can be fictional. Describe the
        characteristics of a mission, goal, and objective, as defined in this chapter, and how the example demonstrates those
        characteristics.

   References

    Philadelphia Police Department, Philadelphia Police Department: Mission Statement, 2009, phillypolice.com/about/mission-
    statement (accessed July 16, 2009).

This page titled 7.1: Project Selection is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

7.1.6  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24691
7.2: Project Scope

  Learning Objectives

    1. Define scope and describe how it is affected by project complexity.
    2. Identify the uses of a scope document.
    3. Describe how a scope document is developed and changed.

The project scope identifies the total work of the project.

Definition of Scope and the Effects of Complexity

The scope document defines what tasks the project team is expected to accomplish and, just as importantly, what is not part of the
project. Depending on the complexity level of the project, the scope document can be as short as one page or as long as several
hundred pages. On more technical projects, such as a project to design an offshore wind-turbine farm, the scope would include a
significant amount of technical specifications, with a focus on the electrical output from the wind turbines. The size and character
of the project scope document is related to the project complexity. Higher scores on the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index indicate
the need for more detailed scope documents.

Uses of a Scope Document

A well-developed project scope statement provides the project team with information the team needs to design and implement the
project execution plan. The well-developed project scope also provides the team with an understanding of the purpose of the
project and the basis for defining project success.

  Scope Document for Training Auto Workers

  An automotive company is building a new plant to produce electric passenger cars in the southeast United States. As the plant
  nears completion, the plant's manager issues a contract to train the new plant workers. The training of workers who will be
  maintaining the production equipment will be done by the equipment suppliers and will not be in the scope of the training
  contract.

The scope of work for the training project will include the identification of the knowledge, skills, and abilities needed by each
classification of worker and the development of the delivery methodology that will effectively and efficiently develop the identified
knowledge, skills, and abilities (online, classroom, hands-on). The scope will also include delivery of the training, evaluation of the
workers after training, and the development of training records. Items not included in the project scope are items that will be the
responsibility of the automotive company, such as the selection and hiring of the workers and the provision of the automotive tools
and equipment needed for training. These exclusions are specifically stated in the scope document. During the design of the plant,
the Human Resources Division of the company explored different workforce models. The plant will be a typical assembly
operation working three shifts. Experience in other plants indicated that a team-based approach combined with a lean
manufacturing philosophy produced the highest productivity. This information was included in the documents provided to the team
developing the training project's scope. The plant manager, the human resources manager, and the plant engineer reviewed and
occasionally made changes to the draft training scope.

    The automotive project described above is a typical example of the types of information and the people involved in developing
    a project scope. From the information in the project description, the project team could develop a project scope document.

   Development of a Scope Document

    The project manager will often develop the first draft of the project scope and then solicit feedback and suggestions from the
    project team, client, and sometimes key vendors. The project manager will attempt to develop consensus around the project
    scope, but the final approval belongs to the project client or sponsor. Depending on the complexity profile of the project, the
    development of the project scope document can be a short discussion between the project manager and the client, or on a large,
    complex project, the process can take weeks.

7.2.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24692
Managing Changes to the Scope Document

The project scope is not a stagnant document, and changes are to be expected. Changes to the project scope are necessary to
reflect new information. Changes to the project scope also create the opportunity for new purposes to emerge that will change
the end results of the project. In some cases, these new results represent a positive outcome for the chartering organization.

Deviation versus Change

If a minor change is made to the schedule that does not affect the completion date of the project, it is a deviation from the
schedule. As long as the end date of the project or major objectives are not delayed, a formal change request to the client is not
needed. Recording and communicating these schedule deviations is still important for coordinating resources and maintaining
the client's awareness of the project's progress.

  Deviation of Labor Cost

  The labor cost was estimated at fifteen dollars per hour for cleaning the project office once per week. The winning bid for
  the contract was at sixteen dollars per hour. The cost deviated from the estimate and a change was made to the budget. This
  was a cost deviation, not a change in scope. The additional cost for the contract was covered from the project contingency
  reserves, and the budget was revised to reflect the changes.

  Truck Crash Causes a Deviation to the Schedule

  Installation of a fence around the project site was delayed when the truck delivering the fence was wrecked on the way to
  the job site. The fence project was delayed by one week and the delay did not affect any other activity on the project. This
  deviation from the original schedule did not cause a delay in the project, and the schedule was adjusted as a deviation to the
  schedule--not a change request.

Documenting Changes

It is important to have a written record of changes to the scope of a project. On the least complex projects, an e-mail message
can be sufficient, but on larger projects a standard form is normally used. The following steps are paraphrased by Tom Mochal
(Mochal & Mochal, 2003), and they have the necessary components of a change documentation process:

    Inform project stakeholders of the change request process.
    Require that the change request is made in writing, including the business value of the change to the project.
    Enter the request in the scope change log.
    Estimate the time needed to evaluate the change. If the evaluation process is time consuming and would affect activity
    completion dates by diverting management resources, get approval from the project sponsor to evaluate the change request.
    If the evaluation is not approved, record the decision in the scope change log.
    Evaluate the change and its impact on the schedule and budget if the evaluation is approved.
    Present the change request to the project sponsor for approval. Record the decision in the scope change log with the
    recommended course of action.
    Distribute the scope change log periodically to team members so they know what changes are being considered and what
    happened to those that were not approved or evaluated.
    If the change is approved, update the project charter or other initiation documents.
    Update the work plan.
    Distribute the revised work plan to stakeholders and team members.

Key Takeaways
    Scope is a description of the major tasks that are included in the project and some of the tasks that are specifically not
    included. More complex projects require more detailed and specific scope documents.
    A scope document is used to provide the project team with the information it needs to design and implement the project
    plan. It provides understanding of the purpose of the project and what project success would be.

7.2.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24692
        The scope document begins as a draft that is circulated for comments by the team, client, and in some cases, key vendors.
        The final draft is approved by the client or sponsor. Changes to the scope are documented carefully using standard forms and
        processes and approved by the project sponsor or client.

   Exercises

     1. How is the scope statement affected by the complexity of the project?
     2. What negative aspect of the scope statement is important?
     3. What are the uses of a scope statement?
     4. Once a scope statement is agreed to, how is it changed and what is always required when a scope statement is changed?

    Internalize your learning experience by preparing to discuss the following.
    Describe a situation where the elements of the project scope did not specifically exclude an activity that caused a
    misunderstanding.

   References

    Mochal, T. and Jeff Mochal, Lessons in Project Management (Berkeley, CA: Apress, 2003).

This page titled 7.2: Project Scope is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

7.2.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24692
7.3: Project Start-Up

  Learning Objectives

    1. Identify the major activities included in project start-up.
    2. Explain how the project start-up activities may differ on a highly complex project.

The parent organization's decision-making process influences when start-up activities of the project will take place. The transition
from planning to project initiation is typically marked by the decision to fund the project and selection of the project manager.
However, selection of the project manager is not always the defining event. Some organizations will have the project manager
involved in project evaluation activities, and some select the project manager after the decision to fund the project has been made.
Including the project manager in the evaluation process enables the project manager to have an understanding of the selection
criteria that he or she can use when making decisions about the project during later phases. Selecting the project manager prior to a
complete evaluation also includes some risks. The evaluation of the project may indicate a need for project manager skills and
experiences that are different from the project manager who is involved in the evaluation.

Selecting the best project manager depends on how that person's abilities match those needed on the project. Those skills can be
determined using the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index (DPCI). If the project profile indicates a high complexity for external
factors and a medium complexity for the project's technology, the profile would indicate the preference for a project manager with
good negotiation skills and an understanding of external factors that affect the project. Because of the technological rating, the
project manager should also be comfortable in working with the technical people assigned to the project. The project manager
involved in the project selection process may not be the best match for the project execution.

During the start-up of a project, the project manager focuses on developing the project infrastructure needed to execute the project
and developing clarity around the project charter and scope. Developing the project infrastructure can be a simple task on a project
with a low complexity level. For example, the project manager of a worker training project in South Carolina who works for a
training college has existing accounting, procurement, and information technology (IT) systems in the college that he or she can
use. On large complex projects, a dedicated project office, IT system, and support staff might be needed that would be more
challenging to set up. For example, on a large construction project in South America, the design and operations offices were set up
in Canada, Chile, and Argentina. Developing compatible IT, accounting, and procurements systems involved a high degree of
coordination. Acquiring office space, hiring administrative support, and even acquiring telephone service for the offices in
Argentina required project management attention in the early phases of the project.

The project manager will conduct one or more kickoff meetings to develop plans for the following activities:

    Establish the project office.
    Develop project policies and procedures.
    Begin refining the scope of work, the schedule, the budget, and the project execution plan.

Depending on the complexity level of the project, these meetings can be lengthy and intense. Tools such as work flow diagrams and
responsibility matrices can be helpful in defining the activities and adding clarity to project infrastructure during the project start-
up.

Typically, the project start-up involves working lots of hours developing the initial plan, staffing the project, and building both
internal and external relationships. The project start-up is the first opportunity for the project manager to set the tone of the project
and set expectations for each of the project team members. The project start-up phase on complex projects can be chaotic, and the
project manager must be both comfortable in this environment and able to create comfort with the client and team members. To
achieve this level of personal comfort, the project manager needs appropriate tools, one of which is an effective alignment process.
This is one of the reasons there are a large number of meetings during the start-up of projects with a high-complexity profile.

Key Takeaways

    The major activities included in project start-up are selecting the project manager; establishing funding; developing project
    infrastructure such as accounting, procurement, and IT; holding a kickoff meeting, determining staffing; and building
    relationships.

7.3.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24693
    The start-up activities for small projects can utilize existing infrastructure for support functions and can have a single start-up
    meeting, while larger projects require more dedicated infrastructure and full-time staff, and the start-up meetings can take
    longer and involve more people.

Exercises

 1. What are four of the major activities that occur during project start-up?
 2. What is one type of start-up activity that is affected by the difference in a project's complexity? Describe the difference in that

    activity between low-, medium-, and high-complexity projects.

Internalize your learning experience by preparing to discuss the following.

    How does the choice of project manager affect the start-up of the project? Include a discussion of the point in the process at
    which the project manager is assigned and how the personality of the manager affects the match between the manager and the
    complexity of the project.

This page titled 7.3: Project Start-Up is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

7.3.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24693
7.4: Alignment Process

  Learning Objectives

    1. Identify the purpose of the alignment process.
    2. Identify the components of the alignment process.
    3. Identify the effects of a lack of trust on a project.

Developing a common understanding among the key stakeholders of the purpose and goals of the project and the means and
methods of accomplishing those goals is called the alignment process. It is important to accomplish this alignment during the
initiation phase. Project managers usually conduct a start-up meeting that is sometimes called a kickoff meeting. The agenda and
duration of the start-up meeting depends on the complexity level of the project. Projects with a limited scope and short duration
may engage in a session start-up meeting over lunch. A medium-complexity project will require a four-hour meeting or more while
a high-complexity project cannot achieve alignment in a single meeting. Alignment can require several days of activities.

  Five-Day Alignment Meeting on a Horse Ranch

  On one large, complex project, the project alignment required a five-day process. Over twenty members of the project team
  and client participated in this alignment. To create a relaxed atmosphere and facilitate an open discussion, the alignment
  meetings and activities were held on a horse ranch in Argentina.

A number of companies specialize in designing and facilitating alignment sessions for large complex projects. Although designed
to meet the needs of each project, alignment sessions have some common agenda items:

    Developing a common understanding of the project purpose
    Agreeing on the means and methods for accomplishing the purpose
    Establishing trust among team members

Common Understanding

A common understanding does not mean building a consensus. People may disagree with the direction being developed, but they
have the same basic understanding as those who agree. For a project plan to be effective, there must be a critical mass or sufficient
commitment among the critical stakeholders. Therefore, disagreement is not fatal to the project execution, but a unified team with a
common understanding is much more powerful and increases the likelihood of success. If disagreement does exist, an open and
forthright discussion will enable the project leadership to address the disagreement in developing the project plan. If the
disagreement stays hidden and is not openly discussed, problems will emerge later in the project.

Developing a common understanding can be as easy as an informal discussion that lasts a few hours, or it can be a lengthy,
complex process. The methods and processes employed to develop a common understanding are directly related to the complexity
of the project. The more complex projects will require more intense discussions around those issues that score high on the
complexity profile.

Developing a common understanding among the key project stakeholders requires the following:

    Defining project success
    Determining potential barriers to success
    Establishing key milestones
    Identifying decision makers and the decision-making process

It is difficult to execute a successful project without first defining what makes a successful project. The first part of this discussion
is easy: the project must be completed on time, within budget, and to all specifications. The next level of the discussion requires
more reflection. During this discussion, reflection on the organization's mission, goals, and related issues such as safety and public
perception of the project emerge.

7.4.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24694
After the team develops a common understanding of project success, a discussion of barriers to achieving that success enables team
members to express skepticism. On more complex projects, the goals of a project often seem difficult to achieve. A discussion by
the team of the potential barriers to project success places these concerns out in the open where team members can discuss and
develop plans to address the barriers. Without this discussion, the perception of these barriers becomes powerful and can have an
effect on project performance.

Project Purpose

The project purpose is sometimes reflected in a written charter, vision, or mission statement. These statements are developed as part
of the team development process that occurs during the project initiation phase and results in a common understanding of the
purpose of the project. A purpose statement derived from a common understanding among key stakeholders can be highly
motivating and connects people's personal investment to a project purpose that has value.

A purpose statement--also called a charter, vision, or mission--provides a project with an anchor or organizational focus.
Sometimes called an anchoring statement, these statements can become a basis for testing key decisions. A purpose statement can
be a powerful tool for focusing the project on actions and decisions that can have a positive impact on project success. For
example, a purpose statement that says that the project will design and build an airplane that will have the best fuel efficiency in the
industry will influence designs on engine types, flight characteristics, and weight. When engineers are deciding between different
types of materials, the purpose statement provides the criteria for making these decisions.

Developing a common understanding of the project's purpose involves engaging stakeholders in dialogue that can be complex and
in-depth. Mission and vision statements reflect some core values of people and their organization. These types of conversations can
be very difficult and will need an environment where people feel safe to express their views without fear of recrimination.

Goals

Goals add clarity to the anchor statement. Goals break down the emotional concepts needed in the development of a purpose
statement and translate them into actions or behaviors, something we can measure. Where purpose statements reflect who we are,
goals focus on what we can do. Goals bring focus to conversations and begin prioritizing resources. Goals are developed to achieve
the project purpose.

Developing goals means making choices. Project goals established during the alignment process are broad in nature and cross the
entire project. Ideally, everyone on the project should be able to contribute to the achievement of each goal.

Goals can have significantly different characteristics. The types of goals and the processes used to develop the project goals will
vary depending on the complexity level of the project, the knowledge and skills of the project leadership team, and the boldness of
the project plan. Boldness is the degree of stretch for the team. The greater the degree of challenge and the greater the distance from
where you are to where you want to be, the bolder the plan and the higher the internal complexity score.

Roles

Role clarity is critical to the planning and execution of the project. Because projects by definition are unique, the roles of each of
the key stakeholders and project leaders are defined at the beginning of the project. Sometimes the roles are delineated in contracts
or other documents. Yet even with written explanations of the roles defined in documents, how these translate into the decision-
making processes of the project is often open to interpretation.

A discussion of the roles of each entity and each project leader can be as simple as each person describing their role and others on
the project team asking questions for clarification and resolving differences in understanding. On less complex projects, this is
typically a short process with very little conflict in understanding and easy resolution. On more complex projects, this process is
more difficult with more opportunities for conflict in understanding.

One process for developing role clarification on projects with a more complex profile requires project team members, client
representatives, and the project's leadership to use a flip chart to record the project roles. Each team divides the flip chart in two
parts and writes the major roles of the client on one half and the roles of the leadership team on the other half. Each team also
prioritizes each role and the two flips charts are compared.

7.4.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24694
This and similar role clarification processes help each project team member develop a more complete understanding of how the
project will function, how each team member understands their role, and what aspects of the role are most important. This
understanding aids in the development or refinement of work processes and approval processes. The role clarification process also
enables the team to develop role boundary spanning processes. This is where two or more members share similar roles or
responsibilities. Role clarification facilitates the development of the following:

    Communication planning
    Work flow organization
    Approval processes
    Role boundary spanning processes

Means and Methods

Defining how the work of the project will be accomplished is another area of common understanding that is developed during the
alignment session. An understanding of the project management methods that will be used on the project and the output that
stakeholders can expect is developed. On smaller and less complex projects, the understanding is developed through a review of the
tools and work processes associated with the following:

    Tracking progress
    Tracking costs
    Managing change

On more complex projects, the team may discuss the use of project management software tools, such as Microsoft Project, to
develop a common understanding of how these tools will be used. The team discusses key work processes, often using flowcharts,
to diagram the work process as a team. Another topic of discussion is the determination of what policies are needed for smooth
execution of the project. Often one of the companies associated with the project will have policies that can be used on the project.
Travel policies, human resources policies, and authorization procedures for spending money are examples of policies that provide
continuity for the project.

Trust

Trust on a project has a very specific meaning. Trust is the filter that project team members use for evaluating information. The
trust level determines the amount of information that is shared and the quality of that information. When a person's trust in another
person on the project is low, he or she will doubt information received from that person and might not act on it without checking it
with another source, thereby delaying the action. Similarly, a team member might not share information that is necessary to the
other person's function if they do not trust the person to use it appropriately and respect the sensitivity of that information. The
level of communication on a project is directly related to the level of trust.

Trust is also an important ingredient of commitment. Team member's trust in the project leadership and the creation of a positive
project environment fosters commitment to the goals of the project and increases team performance. When trust is not present, time
and energy is invested in checking information or finding information. This energy could be better focused on goals with a higher
level of trust (Willard, 1999).

Establishing trust starts during the initiation phase of the project. The kickoff meeting is one opportunity to begin establishing trust
among the project team members. Many projects have team-building exercises during the kickoff meeting. The project team on
some complex projects will go on a team-building outing. One project that built a new pharmaceutical plant in Puerto Rico invited
team members to spend the weekend spelunking in the lime caves of Puerto Rico. Another project chartered a boat for an evening
cruise off the coast of Charleston, South Carolina. These informal social events allow team members to build a relationship that
will carry over to the project work.

Key Takeaways
    The purpose of the alignment process is to develop a common understanding of the purpose, agree on the means and methods,
    and establish trust.
    The components of the alignment process are discussions of the purpose, goals, participant roles, methods of tracking progress
    and costs, methods of managing change, and building trust.

7.4.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24694
    The effects of a lack of trust are delays caused by fact checking or missing information that was not shared because the person's
    discretion was not trusted to handle sensitive information.

Exercises

 1. The initial meeting that is designed to build understanding and consensus around the goals and objectives of the project is the
    __________ meeting.

 2. What are the objectives of the alignment process?
 3. What are five of the seven components of the alignment process?
 4. How can lack of trust between team members adversely affect the project?

Internalize your learning experience by preparing to discuss the following.

Why is an alignment meeting important? What needs to be accomplished, and what are two examples of things that could go wrong
if the alignment meeting does not meet its objectives?

References

Willard, M., "Building Trust: The Relationship Between Trust and High Performance," Axis Advisory 1999,
www.paclink.com/~axis/M7trust.html.

This page titled 7.4: Alignment Process is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

7.4.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24694
7.5: Communications Planning

  Learning Objectives

    1. Describe the differences between communications in an existing organization compared with a new project.
    2. Describe how the detail of the communications plan is related to the complexity of the project.
    3. Describe a communication matrix and its function.
    4. Describe conventions for naming files to indicate their content and the version.

The flow of information between team members and stakeholders is managed by rules set forth in a communications plan.

When a person joins an existing organization, one of the early tasks is to learn the work processes of the organization, including
where to find information, the meeting schedule, and what reports are required. In existing organizations, new members discover
the gatekeepers of information: those persons in the organization who know how to generate or find information. Typically, the
generation, flow, and storage of information reflects the organizational culture, and to effectively communicate in an organization,
a person must be able to develop communication styles and processes consistent with that organization.

Projects do not have the advantage--or sometimes the disadvantage--of an existing organizational culture or communication
structure. The project leadership team develops an understanding of the information needs of the various members and stakeholders
of the projects and develops a communications plan that provides the right information, at the right time, to the right people.

The detail of the communications plan is related to the complexity level of the project. Highly complex projects require a detailed
communications plan to assure that the information needed by the project team and stakeholders is both generated and distributed
to support the project schedule and project decisions. Crucial information can be lost or delayed in a complex project if the
communications plan is not functioning properly.

  Communicating Priorities

  During a project in Tennessee, the project management team was exploring ways to complete the project earlier to meet the
  changing requirements of the project's client. The team identified a number of actions that could create an earlier completion
  date. The plan required an early delivery of critical equipment by a supplier, and the team visited the supplier's senior
  management and agreed to pay a bonus for early delivery of the equipment.

       Two weeks later, during a review of the project procurement team progress, the project manager discovered that the
       organization's procurement department had delayed approvals needed by the supplier because the engineering design was
       not submitted in the required format. This action effectively delayed the project two weeks and reduced the possibility of
       the project team meeting milestone requirements for earning a bonus. The organization's procurement team did not
       understand the critical nature of this supplier's contribution to an early completion of the project. All the information
       needed by the organization's procurement team was in the meeting minutes distributed to the entire team. The procurement
       team did not understand the implications of their work processes, and the result was a delay to the project schedule and a
       reduction in client satisfaction and project profitability.

Effective communication on a project is critical to project success. The Tennessee project is a typical example of errors that can be
created by the breakdown in communication flow. Highly complex projects require the communication of large amounts of data
and technical information that often changes on a frequent basis. The project manager and the leadership team are responsible for
developing a communications plan that provides the right information, at the right place, at the right time. The Tennessee project
example demonstrates that even when the information is at the right place and at the right time, the project procurement leader must
assist the procurement team in understanding the priorities of the project. On large, complex projects, that procurement lead would
not be in the daily communication to subcontractors or vendors. In the Tennessee project example, the procurement leader's unique
understanding that came from participation in the project leadership meeting required a more direct involvement with those
subcontractors and vendors that impacted the project goals.

Just as important, an effective project communications plan does not overload team members and project systems with information
that is not useful. Some project managers will attempt to communicate everything to the entire project team. Although this assures

7.5.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24695
that each team member will receive critical information, the large influx information can make the distillation of the information to
the critical and relevant people more difficult for each team member.

Communication Matrix

A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK Guide) describes tools and techniques for identifying project
stakeholders, defining their information requirements, and determining the appropriate communication technology. The project
includes developing a list of all the people impacted by the outcome of the project and people who can influence the execution of
the project, including project team members. The project leadership then generates a list of information needed or requested by
each stakeholder.

The project leadership team develops a list of communication methods for gathering and communicating project information.
These include a list of reports, meetings, and document flowcharts. The leadership team then typically develops a communication
matrix that details who is included in each project meeting and the distribution of major documents in a table format.

Figure 7.13 Simple Communication Matrix

Project  John (Client)  Sally (Proj Mgr.)  Robert            Jose (Executive  Isiah (Client  Jorge
                                           (Technical Mgr.)  Sponsor)         Consultant)    (Procurement
                                                                                             Mgr.)
Project Scope A         R                  R                 A                R              R
                                                                              I              R
Changes  A              A                  A                 A                I              A
                                                                              R
Meeting notes I         A                  A                 I                R              A
                                                                                             R
RFIs     R              R                  A                 I                I
                                                                                             A
RFQs     R              R                  A                 I

Schedule updates R      A                  A                 I

Technical reviews I     R                  A                 I                R

A = Approval required. R = Review and comment. I = For information only.

Document Control

On large, complex projects, organizing the creation, distribution, and storage of documents is a major and important activity.
Organizations that execute a large number of complex projects will often have project document control systems that the project
leadership team will adapt for their project. Document control systems distribute, store, and retrieve information that is needed by
the project team. Documents originate from the various team members during the planning and execution of the work and then are
transmitted to the document team for cataloging, distributing, and storing.

Document control systems have a systematic numbering system that allows a team member to derive information about the
document through the document number.

  Document Naming Provides Information about the Content

  On a complex project, document names were chosen to indicate the category, location, purpose, author, and date. For example,
  a file named 323RFQDewateringPump_Darnall_10.08.2012 rev 3. contains five pieces of information about the content of the
  file. The first digit of the first number was used to indicate the category of the document. For example, all documents related to
  the project scope started with a 100 number and documents related to procurement started with 300. In this file name, the 3
  indicates the document refers to procurement, the next two digits--23--refer to a location on the project (the south pumping
  station). The naming convention was distributed to team members so that when they saw this file name, they could interpret it

                                              7.5.2                              https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24695
  to mean that the document refers to a procurement document, specifically a request for a quote for a dewatering pump for the
  south pumping station and that the document was prepared by the procurement team member (Darnall) on August 10, 2012.
  One of the naming conventions that was specifically described was the use of date formats in the international format of
  dd/mm/yyyy instead of the American format of mm/dd/yyyy, so team members know this document was created on August 10
  rather than October 8.

When files are stored on a computer, the names can be sorted alphabetically. The beginning of the name is used as the primary
sorting criteria. In the example above, sorting a list of document names would place all the documents together by category (e.g.,
scope and procurement), because all the documents related to scope would begin with a 1 and all those that are related to
procurement would begin with a 3.

When a document is expected to be revised over the course of the project, version control becomes important. Version control
means labeling each revision to enable the team to understand the latest activity and status of the document (or the activity behind
the document). For example, on engineering and construction projects, document control tracks the development and distribution of
documents. Each drawing is given a unique identification that reflects the type of drawing (electrical, civil, etc.), the location (first
floor, mechanical room, etc.), and the version number. Because the design process includes several iterations of the drawings as
more information is developed, document control uses an identification that indicates the version of the document.

For example, a project will use letters to indicate the version of the document until the document is approved for construction, and
then it is given a number after approval. Therefore, a document with revision D will be the fourth version of the document. The
same document with revision 3 means that this is third revision after the project was approved for construction.

To assure that everyone who should either review or approve the document received a copy, document control develops a
distribution list for each type of documents. Each person reviews and signs the distribution list and then sends the document to the
next person on the list. The design documents, distribution lists, and other project documents are archived by document control for
future reference. In the example above, the document was the third revision after the design was approved for construction.

Naming conventions for files and the versions of files should be consistent with the practices of the parent organization or with the
client organization so that the files may be archived with files from other projects. For example, California Road Construction
Projects require a specific file naming convection.

  Document Naming Convention in California

  All Highway Construction Projects (Roadway) are required to be named in accordance with the following naming convention:

d12345ppXXX

    d = District code. The district code represents the district where the project is being constructed (not the district creating the
    CADD drawings). Districts 1-9 use a single numeric character (1-9, respectively). Districts 10 through 12 use a single alpha
    character (a-c, respectively).
    12345 = First five characters of the project expenditure authorization.
    pp = Print Sequence Code (two alpha characters).
    XXX = Respective sheet numbers (numerical characters) for each Print Sequence Code used in the project.

For example, 512121ic007.dgn

    5 = District 05.
    12121 = First five characters of the project expenditure authorization.
    ic = Print Sequence Code (Drainage Details).
    007 = Sheet number (seventh Drainage Detail sheet).

Key Takeaways
    In an existing organization, there are gatekeepers of information who know how to find it, when meetings are scheduled, and
    what reports are required. In a new project, the project manager can create a new flow of information and reporting
    requirements.
    More complex projects require more sophisticated communications plans.

7.5.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24695
    A communication matrix is a table that shows the names of people as column or row headings and the types of documents as
    row or column headings. In the cells where the name and document type intersect, a symbol indicates the person's responsibility
    or access with regard to that type of document.
    File names can be used as codes to describe the contents of the file. Parts of the name can be used to identify the category,
    location, subject, author, and date. File name conventions should be used that match those used by the parent organization or by
    the client.

Exercises

 1. A table that relates types of documents, people, and their responsibilities and access is a communications ____________.
 2. How do communications on a new project differ from communications in an existing organization?
 3. How does the communications plan differ for a complex project compared to a simple project? Provide an example.
 4. What is the purpose of using a document naming convention? Describe at least three types of information that the file name

    could contain.

Internalize your learning experience by preparing to discuss the following.

    What is the purpose of a communications plan and what is an example of a problem that might arise if the communications plan
    is not complete and an example of a problem that might arise if the communications plan is not followed?

This page titled 7.5: Communications Planning is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

7.5.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24695
7.6: Exercises

Exercises at the end of the chapter are designed to strengthen your understanding and retention of the information recently acquired
in the chapter.

Essay Questions

Write several paragraphs to provide more in-depth analysis and consideration when answering the following questions.

 1. Choose an organization of which you are a member. Identify the type of organization (profit, not-for-profit, government) and
    locate its mission statement. Quote the mission statement and then analyze it to determine if it has the four elements described
    in this chapter as necessary for a well-written mission statement. Revise the mission statement, if necessary, so that it addresses
    all four of the elements of a well-written mission statement.

 2. Describe the pros and cons of assigning a project manager to the project during the design phase. Describe how the complexity
    of the project might affect that decision.

 3. Describe a project with which you are familiar that suffered from lack of alignment. Identify the component of alignment that
    was missing and its effects.

 4. Describe the function of a communication matrix and provide an example of how it would be used to create, edit, approve, and
    distribute a particular type of document.

Discussion

The exercises in this section are designed to promote exchange of information among students in the classroom or in an online
discussion. The exercises are more open ended, which means that what you find might be completely different from what your
classmates find, and you can all benefit by sharing what you have learned.

 1. Effects of lack of trust: Relate an example of a project on which you worked where the participants did not know each other
    well enough to trust each other, and describe the effect of this lack of trust on the project. Describe alignment activities that
    could have increased trust on that project.

 2. Describe an example of a project with which you have been personally involved that suffered from undocumented changes in
    scope. Consider an example provided by a classmate and determine if their example is a deviation or a scope change and if it
    requires a scope change, how should it have been handled? Demonstrate your knowledge of the steps for making scope changes
    described in the text.

 3. What is the mission statement of your college or university? Give an example of a recent project undertaken by the
    organization. Determine if the project directly supports the stated mission and explain your opinion.

 4. Do you think a communication matrix is necessary on a small project that only involves six people? Be prepared to support
    your opinion with examples.

This page titled 7.6: Exercises is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

7.6.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24696
7.7: Software and Technology Exercise

  Learning Objectives

    1. Use a spreadsheet to calculate cash flow, payback, and Internal Rate of Return (IRR).

Create a Worksheet to Calculate Cash Flow, Payback, and IRR

Projects that purport to save money or earn additional money in the future as a result of spending money now can be evaluated and
compared using basic financial tools. A simple payback analysis determines how long it will be before the result of the project pays
off the initial investment, and the Internal Rate of Return (IRR) is a percentage similar to an interest rate that can be compared to
other projects or investment opportunities.

How to Set Up a Spreadsheet to Show Cash Flow, Simple Payback, and Calculate IRR

 1. Start Excel 2007. In cells A1 through A5, type Payback and Internal Rate of Return, Year, Expense, Income/Savings, Annual
    Cash Flow, Cumulative Cash Flow, and Internal Rate of Return (IRR). Drag the boundary between column A and B to the right
    to increase the width of column A, as shown in Figure 7.14 "Widen Column to Fit Labels".

                                                                  Figure 7.14 Widen Column to Fit Labels

 2. In cell B2, type 0, and in cell C2, type 1. Click and drag across cells B2 and C2 to select them both. Identify the fill handle at
    the lower right corner of C2 as shown in Figure 7.15 "Use Fill Handle to Extend a Pattern of Intervals". Selecting the first two
    numbers in a sequence determines the interval of the sequence.

 3. Click and drag the fill handle to the right to cell H2. The sequence of years from zero to six is filled into cells B2 through H2.
 4. In cell B3, type $(100,000) and then press the Enter key. Typing a number with the dollar sign and comma sets the formatting

    automatically. The parentheses indicate a negative number that the computer may display in red.
 5. In cell C3, type $(2,000) and then press Enter. Click cell C3 again to select it. Drag the fill handle to the right to cell H3.

    Because a single value was selected, the same value is filled into cells D3 through H3, as shown in Figure 7.16 "Initial Expense
    in Year Zero Followed by Annual Expenses".
 6. In cell C4, type 25,000 and then press Enter. Use the procedure you practiced in step 5 to fill this value into cells D4 through
    H4.
 7. In cell B5, type =B4+B3 and then press Enter. This formula adds the positive and negative cash flows in the two cells above its
    location to find the annual cash flow.
 8. Click cell B5 and then drag the fill handle to cell H5 to fill this formula into the adjacent cells. The formulas adapt to their new
    locations to add the two cells immediately above. Click cell D5 to observe how the formulas change to sum the cells above, as
    shown in Figure 7.17 "Formula to Calculate a Running Total".
 9. In cell B6, type =B5 and then press Enter. This formula transfers the value for the initial expense to cell B6 so the next formula
    can be used in the remaining cells.
10. In cell C6, type =B6+C5 and then press Enter. This formula sums the value from the previous year with the annual cash flow
    for the current year.
11. Click cell C6 and then drag the fill handle to cell H6. Observe from the change in color or from the missing parentheses that the
    cumulative cash flow becomes positive in year five, as shown in Figure 7.18 "Initial Investment Paid Back in Year Five".
12. In cell B7, type =IRR(B5:H5) and then press Enter. The spreadsheet program uses a bui -ch07_s07_s01_s01_f06">Figure 7.19
    "IRR Can Be Used to Choose between Very Different Projects". Notice that the IRR function uses the annual cash flows in row
    5 and not the cumulative cash flow in row 6.

7.7.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24697
13. Click cell A1. Type Payback and Internal Rate of Return and then press Enter. Click and drag cells A1 through H1 to select
    them. On the ribbon, in the Alignment group, click the Merge and Center button. The new title is centered across the columns,
    as shown in Figure 7.20 "Center the Title". This worksheet can be used and extended to determine simple payback and IRR for
    a variety of projects.

14. In cell A9, type your name.
15. Check your formulas and calculations. Change the initial expense in cell B3 to $(90,000). The values that depend on the initial

    expense should all change and produce new cash flows and a different IRR of 14 percent.
16. Click cell B7 to select it and to show the IRR function on the formula bar.
17. Capture a screen that shows the recalculated values, the IRR function, and your name. Open a word processing file and paste

    the screen into the document. Save the word processing file as Ch07FinanceStudentName.doc and close it.
18. Save the worksheet and close it. Keep it where you can find it to demonstrate the provenance of your work, if necessary.
19. Review your work and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

Element                         Best                           Adequate      Poor

File name                       Ch07FinanceStudentName.doc Ch07FinanceStudentName.doc x Other name

Use a spreadsheet to calculate  Screen capture of spreadsheet  Same as Best  Incorrect formulas; incorrect
cash flow, payback, and         after the value in B3 is                     range for the IRR function;
Internal Rate of Return (IRR)   changed to negative $90,000,                 negative numbers not
                                with cell B7 selected to show                formatted; name not shown
                                the IRR function on the
                                toolbar

20. Save the file and submit it as directed by the instructor.

This page titled 7.7: Software and Technology Exercise is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                      7.7.2                                  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24697
CHAPTER OVERVIEW

8: Project Time Management

  8.1: Types of Schedules
  8.2: Elements of Time Management
  8.3: Critical Path and Float
  8.4: Managing the Schedule
  8.5: Project Scheduling Software
  8.6: Exercises
  8.7: Software and Technology Exercises
This page titled 8: Project Time Management is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                                                                              1
8.1: Types of Schedules

  Learning Objectives

    1. Define the types of project schedules.

The schedule develops as the project moves from its early conceptual phase into the execution phase.

Conceptual

When the scope of the project is being determined, a simple schedule that shows the major tasks and approximate start and end
dates is developed to allow senior management to make decisions about the scope of the project. Detail is not required at this stage
because entire tasks might be dropped from the scope, or the whole project might not be approved.

Master

If the project is chosen, a master schedule is created. It has major events and dates such as the starting date and the completion date.
The master schedule is often part of a contract. Changes to the master schedule must be approved using a documented change
process with approval by the project sponsor and client.

Detail

To execute the master schedule, the major activities are broken down into smaller activities and resources are assigned to those
activities. The most detailed versions or portions of the schedule may be developed a few weeks prior to the execution of those
activities and are called two-week plans. Portions of the master schedule that affect particular vendors might be sent to them so
they can provide detailed activities that they would perform.

Key Takeaway
    Types of schedules vary in detail. A broad, general conceptual schedule is used in the earliest phases of the project design. A
    master schedule with start date, milestones, and completion date becomes part of the contract and is changed by mutual
    agreement using a formal change process. Details are added to the master schedule as needed to perform the work of the project
    activities.

Exercises

 1. A _________ schedule identifies major types of activities and approximate start and end dates for use in decision making about
    the scope of the project.

 2. A schedule of activities that is prepared every two weeks is the _______ schedule.
 3. How does a conceptual schedule differ from a master schedule?
Conceptual Schedule

Choose an activity that you are considering and describe a conceptual schedule for it. Limit the schedule to between five and ten
major sections. Make a rough estimate of the duration and cost of each phase.

This page titled 8.1: Types of Schedules is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

8.1.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24698
8.2: Elements of Time Management

  Learning Objectives

    1. Describe a work breakdown structure and how it relates to activities.
    2. Describe the use of graphic representations for time management.

According to the Project Management Institute (PMI), project time management includes the following elements (Project
Management Institute, Inc., 2008):

    Define activities
    Sequence activities
    Estimate activity resources
    Estimate activity durations
    Develop schedule
    Control schedule

The list of activities, their relationship to each other, and estimates of durations and required resources comprise the work
breakdown structure (WBS). The project WBS is a hierarchical--classified according to criteria into successive levels--listing and
grouping of the project activities required to produce the deliverables of the project. The WBS represents a breakdown of the
project into components that encompass the entire scope of the project. Each level of the WBS hierarchy represents a more detailed
description of the project work so that the highest level represents broad categories, and the lower levels represent increasing
amounts of detail.

Larger and more complex projects often require a larger WBS. The size of the WBS is directly related to the amount of work on the
project and how that work is divided into work packages. The WBS can be developed around the project phases or the project units
or functions that will be performing the work. A WBS organized around the project phases facilitates the understanding of the
amount of work required for each phase of the project. A WBS developed around the project units or functions of the project
facilitates the understanding of the amount of work required for each function.

The following example, named John's move, has a low level of complexity compared to a larger project. Normally, this project
would not receive the amount of detailed planning described in the following examples, but the authors chose to use a basic project
that is familiar to most students to help them focus on learning the new concepts.

  Changing Jobs

  John has a small but important project. He has accepted a job in Atlanta and now has to move from Chicago to Atlanta and be
  there, ready to work, right after the Christmas holidays. If the furniture arrives in good condition at least two days before John
  starts work, and for less than Five thousand dollars, the project will be a success. The move to Chicago five years ago cost five
  thousand dollars, but John is smarter now and will use his friends to help, so he is confident he can stay within budget.

Developing a WBS begins by defining and developing lists of all activities--work performed on the project that consumes project
resources, including cost and time--needed to accomplish the work of the project. The first draft of the WBS includes activities at
the highest level of the hierarchy or the management level and typically includes the major activities or summary activities required
to accomplish the deliverables identified in the project scope of work.

  Top-Level Activities in Move Planning

  On John's move project, these top-level activities are numbered 1, 2, 3, and so on. For example, a plan for the move is the
  major deliverable from 1 Plan Move, as shown below.

  Figure 8.3 Top Level of WBS

    1. Plan Move

8.2.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24699
    2. Prepacking
    3. Packing
    4. Moving
    5. Unpacking
    6. Project Closeout

  The work breakdown structure is then decomposed--broken down into smaller units. The 1.1, 1.2, and 1.3 numbers are the
  first subdivision of the work. For example, one of John's Summary Level Activities is Packing (3.0). Although some minor
  packing (delicate items: 2.4) are packed under another summary activity, 3.3 is the major packing and includes the
  coordination and support of labor (friends Dion and Carlita). The activity is then decomposed--separated into basic elements
  --to the next level by listing the individual rooms that need packed, as shown below.

  Figure 8.4 Major Activity Decomposed into Smaller Activities

  3. Packing

          3.1. Confirm Dion's and Carlita's help

          3.2. Pick up donuts and coffee

          3.3. Pack apartment

                 3.3.1. Pack kitchen

                 3.3.2. Pack living room

                 3.3.3. Pack bedroom

                 3.3.4. Pack remaining items

  The WBS could be decomposed further to a greater level of detail by listing the tasks needed for each activity. For example
  activity 3.3.3, Pack Bedroom, can be decomposed into additional tasks, such as 3.3.3.1 Pack Closet, 3.3.3.2 Pack Drawers, and
  3.3.3.3 Pack Blankets. This type of numbering of the activities is called intelligent numbering. In intelligent numbering, the
  numbering system has meaning so that a member of the project team knows something about the activity by the number of the
  activity. For example, any activity associated with packing begins with a 3; even picking up donuts can be an activity that
  supports packing. The donuts are a form of payment for the labor of Dion and Carlita.

The WBS is developed or decomposed to the level that the manager needs to control or manage the project. Typically, larger and
more complex projects require a more detailed WBS.

Estimation of Duration

After the project team has created the WBS, each activity is reviewed and evaluated to determine the duration (how long it will
take to accomplish from beginning to end) and what resources (time, materials, facilities, and equipment) are needed. An estimate
is an educated guess based on knowledge, experience, and inference--the process of deriving conclusions based on assumptions.
The accuracy of the estimate is related to the quality of the knowledge and how that knowledge is applied. The person with the
most knowledge may not be the most objective person to provide duration estimates. The person responsible for the work may also
want to build in extra time. Multiple inputs into the duration estimate and a more detailed WBS help reduce bias--the making of
decisions based on a prejudged perspective.

The unit of time used to develop the activity duration is a function of the level of detail needed by the user of the schedule. The
larger and more complex the project, the greater the need for detail, which usually translates into shorter durations for activities.

8.2.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24699
  Duration Estimate for Training

  On a new plant start-up, the plant manager may need to know when the new employees will start training, when they will be
  fully trained, and when they can begin working in the plant. The plant human resources manager may need to know what skills
  workers need and how much time each training class will take. The schedule detail the HR manager needs will include
  activities to locate facilities, schedule training, write contracts for trainers, and manage the initiation of training classes. The
  trainer will need an even greater level of detail, which could be measured in days or even hours.

On our John's move example, the project schedule may have been just as effective without detailing the packing of the individual
rooms in the old apartment. If we deleted these items, would John know when he needed to pack each one of these rooms? If the
answer is yes, then we may not need that level of detail.

The activity duration is the length of time the activity should take to complete from beginning to end. The unit of duration is
typically working days but could include other units of time such as hours, weeks, or months. The unit chosen should be used
consistently throughout the schedule.

An important event, such as a ground-breaking ceremony or receipt of occupancy from the building inspector, is called a milestone.
A milestone has no duration or resources. It is simply an indicator of an important point in the project.

Resource Allocation and Calendars

A common resource constraint is availability. To consider the availability of team members, consultants, and key pieces of
equipment, you can create a resource calendar for each that indicates which days are available and which are days off for a group,
an individual, or a project asset such as a piece of important equipment. A calendar for team members from the same company
could be the company calendar that shows working days, weekend days, and holidays. Individual team members can have
individual calendars that show their vacation days or other days off, such as parental leave days. If major pieces of equipment are
only available for certain periods of time, they can be given a resource calendar. Resource calendars become important tools when
changes must be made to the schedule. When a resource calendar is applied to a duration estimate, the duration in days is
distributed across the available calendar days. For example, if the duration is three days and the start date of the activity is
Thursday, the activity would begin on Thursday and end on Monday of the following week, assuming the resource calendar shows
that the person has the weekend off. If the weekend included an extra day off for a holiday like Labor Day, shown in the calendar in
Figure 8.6, the completion day of the same three-day activity would be pushed to Tuesday.

8.2.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24699
                                                  Figure 8.6

Nonworking days can be designated in a calendar.

Activity Sequencing

Determining the schedule of a project begins by examining each activity in the WBS to determine its relationship to the other
activities.

Project Logic

The project logic is the development of the activity sequence or determining the order in which the activities will be completed.
The process for developing the project logic involves identifying the predecessors--activities that come before--and successors--
the activities that come after.

 Project Logic for John's Move

 In our example of John's move, contacting Dion and Carlita--activity 1.1--comes before the lunch meeting is scheduled. You
 must logically contact Dion and Carlita before you schedule your Host Planning Lunch--activity 1.2. Your conversation with
 Dion and Carlita will provide you with dates they are available and establish their commitment to help you move. Therefore,
 the conversation with Dion and Carlita is a predecessor to the Host Planning Lunch Activity. This relationship is diagramed
 below.

                                                  8.2.4       https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24699
                                                            Figure 8.7 Relationship between Two Activities

These terms define a relationship that is similar to a family relationship like father and son. The father exists in time before the son.
Similarly, each element of the diagram can have predecessor-successor relationships with other elements, just like a father can be
the son of someone else. Unlike the biological father-son relationship, activities can have more than one predecessor.

The relationship between a predecessor activity and a successor activity is called a dependency. The successor activity starts after
and is dependent on the predecessor activity. Because the conversation with Dion and Carlita must take place before a planning
meeting can be scheduled, this is called a natural dependency because the relationship can be inferred logically. Activities that have
predecessor-successor relationships occur sequentially--one after the other. Another term for this type of relationship is finish-start,
which means the first activity must finish before the next one can start. Refer to the figure above.

Some activities take place concurrently--at the same time. If they must begin at the same time, they have a start-start relationship.
If the activities can start at different times but they must finish at the same time, they have a finish-finish relationship. Refer to
Figure 8.8.

                                                                                  Figure 8.8
Concurrent activities can be constrained to finish at the same time or start at the same time.

8.2.5                                                                                           https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24699
  Predecessor Relationships in John's Move
  The figure below shows the activities in John's move with the predecessors identified for the Plan Move and Prepacking
  groups of activities. Because the finish-start relationship is by far the most common, the type of relationship is assumed to be
  finish-start unless otherwise mentioned.

  Figure 8.9 Outline of Activities with Predecessors Identified
  (Predecessors are in parentheses)
    1. Plan Move/Project Start

        1. Contact Dion and Carlita
        2. Host planning lunch (1a)
        3. Develop and distribute schedule (1b)
        4. Make hotel arrangement in Atlanta (1a)
    2. Prepacking
        1. Gather packing material
        2. Select moving van company and sign contract

            1. Contact 3 moving van companies and get bids (1c)
            2. Select company and negotiate a final price (2bi)
            3. Sign moving contract (2bii)
        3. Pack small delicate items (1c, 2a)

Lag and Lead Times

Most activities in a network diagram have a finish-start relationship. If a certain amount of time must go by before a successor
activity can begin, the required delay is called lag time. For example, concrete does not reach its full strength for several days after
it is poured. Lag time is required between the end of the pouring process and the beginning of construction that puts stress on the
concrete as diagrammed in Figure 8.10. Similarly, you must allow lag time for payment checks to be processed by the banking
system before you can spend the money.

                                                                                 Figure 8.10
    In some cases, the successor activity can overlap the end of its predecessor activity and begin before the predecessor is finished.
    This is called lead time.

      Lead Time in John's Move
       In John's move, you might begin separating the small and delicate items that will be packed in step 2.3 before you get the
       packing materials in step 2.1 so that when the materials are available, step 2.3 is already partially completed. If the
       preparing the small items for packing can overlap its predecessor and shortens the time it takes to accomplish both tasks by
       a day, it has a lead time of one day.

8.2.6  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24699
                                                                                    Figure 8.11
        Overlap is called the lead time of the successor activity.

The characteristics and identifiers of an activity are its attributes.

At this point in the process of analyzing John's move, each activity has an identifying code, a short description, predecessors, and
lead or lag times, as shown in a partial table of activities in Figure 8.12 "Table of Attributes".

Figure 8.12 Table of Attributes

Code   Description               Predecessors  Relationships      Lead/Lag
1a     Contact Dion and Carlita  None          FS (Finish/Start)  0
1b     Host planning lunch       1a                               0

1c Develop and distribute schedule 1b FS 0

1d Make hotel arrangement in Atlanta 1a FS 0

2a     Gather packing material None                               0

       Contact moving van

2bi    companies and get three 1c              FS                 0

       bids

2bii Select company and get final price 2bi FS 0

2biii  Sign moving contract 2bii               FS                 0

2c Pac small and delicate items 1c and 2a FS and FS 1

Milestones

Milestones are significant events in your project. An effective milestone schedule will capture the major constraints to the project
schedule and provide a summary level overview of the project. Even though milestone events are significant to the project, they
consume no resources and have no duration. Milestones are usually indicated on the project schedule with a diamond and often
have a vertical line on a time-scaled graph to show the relationship of various schedule paths to the milestone.

                                     8.2.7                        https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24699
In our John's move project, we might create a milestone called "all packing complete" to represent the date when everything is
packed and ready for the moving van. Any delay in this date will mean a delay in the arrival of the moving van in Chicago, a delay
in the arrival of the moving van in Atlanta, and a delay of all the unpacking and other downstream activities. See Figure 8.13
"Gantt Chart".

Graphic Representations

Relationships between activities are easier to recognize if they are presented using graphics such as bar charts or a network of
connected boxes.

Bar Charts

The type of bar chart used to illustrate activity relationships in a project is the Gantt chart. The Gantt chart was developed by Henry
Gantt and used on major projects, including building the Hoover Dam and the U.S. interstate highway system (Reference.com,
2009). The Gantt chart, also called a bar chart, is a time-scaled graphic that represents each activity with a bar that reflects the
duration, start, and finish time, as shown in Figure 8.13 "Gantt Chart".

                                                                          Figure 8.13 Gantt Chart

A Gantt chart is easy to read and provides sufficient information for project team members to plan activities within a short time
frame. For many larger projects, a two-week bar chart, extracted from the larger master schedule, provides the information needed
for team members and contractors to coordinate activity details. The Gantt chart provides information for simple planning but is
limited because a Gantt chart does not illustrate complex relationships well.

Network Diagrams

People recognize relationships and patterns more effectively when they look at diagrams like the one in Figure 8.14 "Project
Network Diagram". The precedence diagram method (PDM) is a technique for graphically displaying the logic of the schedule by
placing the activities in boxes with arrows between them to show the precedence-successor relationships. The boxes in this type of
diagram are called nodes and the arrows indicate finish-start relationships. Compare the diagram in Figure 8.14 "Project Network
Diagram" to the outline in Figure 8.9 "Outline of Activities with Predecessors Identified" to see how much easier it is to trace a
sequential path from one activity to the next in the precedence diagram. This type of diagram is also called a project network
diagram.

8.2.8  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24699
                                                                 Figure 8.14 Project Network Diagram

Key Takeaways
    The work breakdown structure is a list of activities, including estimates of their durations, their relationships with others, and
    the resources assigned to them.
    Bar charts are used to indicate durations and sequencing where the relationships are simple. Network diagrams are used to show
    complex relationships between activities.

Exercises

 1. What is work breakdown structure?
 2. If two activities are concurrent and they have the same completion date, they have a _______-_______ relationship.
 3. A calendar that shows when a person, facility, or key piece of equipment is available is a __________ calendar.
 4. What is the advantage of a network diagram over a bar chart for illustrating the critical path?

Compare Charts

Perceptions of graphic representations of data differ among individuals. Consider the bar chart and network diagram in this section.
Describe which type of chart conveys the important aspects of the project best to you personally and why you think that is the case.
Alternatively, describe which aspects of the project are conveyed to you best by which type of chart.

References

Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK Guide), 4th ed. (Newtown
Square, PA: Project Management Institute, Inc., 2008), 129.

Reference.com, "Henry Gantt," www.reference.com/browse/wiki/Henry_Gantt (accessed July 27, 2009).

This page titled 8.2: Elements of Time Management is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

8.2.9  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24699
8.3: Critical Path and Float

  Learning Objectives
    1. Calculate critical path, project float, early start dates, and late start dates.

The critical path is the path through the network that results in the latest completion date of the project.
If any activity on the critical path is delayed, the completion of the project will be delayed by an equal amount. It is the path with
the greatest total duration. To determine the critical path, add the amount of time estimated for the duration of each activity to the
previous activity to determine which path through the network has the longest total duration, as shown in Figure 8.15 "Critical
Path". Durations are indicated in days. The critical path through these tasks takes at least eight days. Activities on the critical path
are shaded.

                                                                         Figure 8.15 Critical Path

Early Start Dates

Starting dates can be assigned to each activity by doing a forward pass proceeding from left to right in the network diagram
beginning with the project start date. The dates derived by this method are the early start (ES) dates. The early start date for an
activity is the earliest date the activity can begin. The estimate considers durations and resource availability calendars. To calculate
early start dates, begin with the project start date and assign that date as the start date of activities that have no predecessor
activities. Follow these steps to calculate the early start dates of subsequent activities, assuming finish-start relationships:

    Add the predecessor activity's duration to its start date.
    Add the lag time or subtract the lead time.
    Refer to the resource calendar (or calendars) that applies to the people and equipment necessary for the activity, and add the
    number of off-days that the activity would span on those calendars.
    Assign the calculated date as the early start date of the successor activity.

  Forward Pass for John's Move

  John begins planning his move to Atlanta the same day he accepts the job. The start date in this example is Monday, November
  29, 2010. Tasks 1.1 and 2.1 can both start on that day, so the early start dates for tasks 1.1 and 2.1 are November 29. John
  calculates the early start date for the activities. A partial list is provided below. Compare the figure below and the figure in the
  next sidebar. Observe that John is willing to work on weekends, but activity 2.2.3 is delayed by two days because one of the
  moving companies did not provide bids on the weekend. Observe that activity 2.3 has a lead time of one day, but that
  relationship is between activity 2.1 and 2.3. The network path from activity 1.3 is longer, so the lead time with activity 2.1 is
  not considered in calculating the early start date of 2.3.

  Figure 8.16 Early Start Dates Determined by a Forward Pass

8.3.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24700
Code   Description Predecessors Relationships Lead/Lag  Resources    Duration  Early Start
1a                                                                   2 d       Date
1b     Contact Dion    None                      0      J,D,C        1 d       11/29
1c     and Carlita     1a    FS (Finish/Start) 0        .25 hr each            12/1
                       1b                                                      12/2
1d     Host planning                                    J,D,C
       lunch           1a                               2 hr each              11/30
2a
       Develop and     None  FS  0                      J 2 hr       1 d       11/29
2bi    distribute
2bii   schedule        1c    FS  0                      J .5 hr      1 d       12/3
2biii                  FS
2c     Make hotel      2bii      0                      D 2 hr       1 d       12/8
       arrangement     1c                                                      12/3
       in Atlanta      2a    FS                                      2 d

       Gather                0   J .5 hr                1 d          12/7
       packing
       material              FS                                      1 d

       Contact van           FS FS -1                   C 6 hr       1 d
       companies
       and get 3 bids

       2bi

       Sign moving
       contract

       Pack small
       and delicate
       items

Doing this process manually is error prone and time consuming. Fortunately, there are computer programs to assist in the process,
but the project manager must understand the process well enough to recognize computer errors. Computer software must be
combined with common sense or good judgment.

Float

Float, sometimes called slack, is the amount of time an activity, network path, or project can be delayed from the early start without
changing the completion date of the project.

Total Float

Total float is the difference between the finish date of the last activity on the critical path and the project completion date. Any
delay in an activity on the critical path would reduce the amount of total float available on the project. A project can also have
negative float, which means the calculated completion date of the last activity is later than the targeted completion date established
at the beginning of the project.

 Float in John's Move

 The last activity in John's move has an early start date of December 28 and a duration of one day. John could start work on
 Wednesday, December 29. John's first day at work is Monday, January 3, so the project has a total float of five days.

                                 8.3.2                               https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24700
                                                                                            Figure 8.17 Total Project Float

Late Start Dates

The next step is to work through the network diagram from right to left beginning with the mandated completion date, which is a
milestone that is set in the project plan. Subtract the duration of each activity in each path to determine the latest date the activity
could begin and still meet the project completion date. Resource calendars must be considered in the backward pass as well as the
forward pass.

To calculate late start dates, begin with the project completion milestone and assign that date as the finish date of its predecessor
activities. Follow these steps to calculate the late start dates of predecessor activities, assuming finish-start relationships:

    Subtract the predecessor activity's duration from its late finish date.
    Subtract the lag time or add the lead time to the late finish date.
    Refer to the resource calendar (or calendars) that applies to the people and equipment necessary for the activity, and subtract the
    number of off days that the activity would span on those calendars.
    Assign the calculated date as the late start date of the predecessor activity.

The difference between the early start date and the late start date for activities on the critical path is usually the same as the total
float, unless the activities are affected by the resource calendars differently in the forward and backward pass. For example, if a
piece of key equipment is only available for a few days, activities that depend on it have the same start and finish dates in the
forward and backward passes.

Free Float

If activities that are not on the critical path have a difference between their early start date and their late start date, those activities
can be delayed without affecting the project completion date. The float on those activities is called free float.

Key Takeaway
    To calculate total project float, begin at the start date and add the duration of each activity in each possible path through the
    network diagram, including nonworking days from the resource calendars, to determine the early project end date. The longest
    path through the network is the critical path. The difference between the early end date and the required completion date of the
    project is the total project float, and the start date of each activity is the early start date. To calculate the late start dates, begin
    with the required project completion date and work backward, subtracting the duration of each activity through each possible
    pathway.

Exercises

 1. The path through the network diagram that has the longest total duration is the __________ path.
 2. The difference between the sum of the activity durations along the critical path and the project completion date is the project

    _______.
 3. If two sequential activities overlap and the successor activity can begin three days before the predecessor begins, those three

    days are called _________ time.

8.3.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24700
 4. If the last activity in the critical path has a completion date that is five days later than the project completion date, the project
    has a _______ _________ (two words) of five days.

 5. What is the difference between free float and project float?
 6. If an activity has a duration of three days, how do you calculate the finish date in a way that considers availability of the

    resources for that activity?
 7. What would be an example of lag time between two activities?

Project Float

Consider a project in which you have been involved that experienced unexpected delays. Describe how the project's manager dealt
with the delays. Specifically, consider if the delay was due to an activity that was on the project's critical path, if people or
resources were diverted from other tasks, or if free float existed in the original schedule. Describe the ultimate effect on the
project's completion date.

This page titled 8.3: Critical Path and Float is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

8.3.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24700
8.4: Managing the Schedule

  Learning Objectives

    1. Describe methods of tracking and reporting progress.
    2. Define resource leveling.
    3. Describe methods of accelerating the schedule.

To manage a schedule, the project manager must know how the work is progressing compared to the master schedule and, if
necessary, make changes to keep the project on time.

Tracking and Reporting Progress

Tracking the schedule performance involves measuring the work performed against the work expected to be performed with a
given expenditure of resources. Periodic reporting on the progress of the project provides the project management team with
information on how the project is performing against expectations and to make decisions and corrections. Accurate measurement of
schedule performance requires planning during the early stages of the project to determine the unit of measure and process for
tracking progress.

Reporting Percentage Completed

To determine the percentage of a project that has been completed, the project manager must determine what to measure. Some
percentages are misleading. For example, a project that has completed 25 percent of the scheduled activities does not mean that the
project is 25 percent complete. In our John's move example, four rooms were to be packed. After the bedroom was packed, packing
was not 25 percent complete. The kitchen contained five times as many items and required more delicate, time-consuming packing.
John estimated that 40 percent of the items to be packed were in the kitchen, 20 percent in the living room, 20 percent in the
bedroom, and the remaining 20 percent in miscellaneous locations. If the unit of measure for these activities is items packed, the
packing is only 20 percent complete instead of 25 percent if rooms are the unit of measure.

The unit of measure for tracking schedule progress is related to the estimate. If hours of labor are used as the unit of measure, the
percentage of packing is even less because more time is estimated to pack each item in the kitchen. As the project management
team estimates the duration for each activity, the amount of work to accomplish the tasks is captured in both resources expended
and a unit of measure for tracking progress. The unit of measure is related to the type of project. On a software development
project, the unit of measure may be lines of code written. The unit of measure that is chosen can affect the quality of the work.

  Units of Measure on a Programming Project

  Steve Ballmer of Microsoft recalls early clashes with IBM over the unit of measure used to determine how much Microsoft
  would get paid for its work.

  In IBM there's a religion in software that says you have to count K-LOCs, and a K-LOC is a thousand lines of code. How big a
  project is it? Oh, it's sort of a 10 K-LOC project. This is a 20 K-LOCer. And this is 50 K-LOCs. And IBM wanted to sort of
  make it the religion about how we got paid. How much money we made off OS/2, how much they did. How many K-LOCs did
  you do? And we kept trying to convince them--hey, if we have--a developer's got a good idea and he can get something done
  in 4 K-LOCs instead of 20 K-LOCs, should we make less money? Because he's made something smaller and faster, less
  KLOC. K-LOCs, K-LOCs, that's the methodology. Ugh anyway, that always makes my back just crinkle up at the thought of
  the whole thing (Cringely, 2009).
  In this case, IBM's insistence on using thousands of lines of code as the unit of measure did not reward Microsoft for writing
  smaller code that would run faster. Microsoft and IBM cancelled their joint project for writing an operating system named
  OS/2. Microsoft wrote Windows, and IBM's OS/2 operating system was not able to compete with it successfully.

On a construction project, a unit of measure may be yards of concrete poured, and on a training project, the unit of measure may be
the class curriculums developed or the students taught.

8.4.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24701
Managing Schedules Using Milestones

Milestones provide the opportunity for project management to focus on completing activities that will have the greatest impact on
the schedule. On complex projects, focusing on the milestones is useful for communicating important dates to the entire project
team. Project team members can then adjust their efforts to complete the activities connected to the milestone events.

Many project leaders believe that time lost on early activities can be made up toward the end of the project. Hard decisions about
paying overtime and working weekends are often delayed until the end of the project when the pressure to complete the project on
time becomes much stronger. Project managers who focus on milestone events create a sense of urgency to meet the milestone
deadlines and spread the urgency to complete the project over the life of the project. Projects that meet milestone dates are more
likely to meet project completion dates.

Informing Stakeholders

A schedule update is distributed regularly to provide project stakeholders with an assessment of the progress of the project against
the master schedule. This updated schedule is called the current schedule. The current schedule provides new start and end dates for
all activities and the project. Calculations based on the current schedule may result in a new critical path and subsequent changes in
the project execution plan.

The project team develops an understanding of the project productivity by comparing the current schedule to the original schedule.
If the schedule is behind original estimates, the project team conducts an assessment of the causes of the schedule slippage and
develops a plan to address the changes to the project. The project management team typically has several alternatives for
addressing changes to the project situation. Selecting the right alternative requires good information.

Resource Leveling

The schedule of activities is constrained by the availability of resources. If you apply the resource calendar to each activity to be
sure the people and equipment are available on those dates, you can still miss an important constraint. If there are several activities
that use a particular person's time on the same days, that person could end up with too many activities scheduled for the same days
and very little on other days. If key people are overloaded, the activities to which they are assigned might not be completed on
time. Managing the schedule of activities to ensure that enough resources are available to complete each task by distributing the
work load is called resource leveling. Activities to which that person is assigned and that have free float can be delayed to reduce
work overload of key people.

Accelerating the Schedule

The project manager must know how to accelerate a schedule to compensate for unanticipated events that delay critical activities or
to accommodate changes in the project completion date. Compressing or crashing the schedule are terms used to describe the
various techniques used to shorten the project schedule. Project managers utilize several techniques to keep projects on schedule.

Contingency Resources

One method of accelerating the schedule is to add activities to the critical path that are empty or that are optional. If the project is
behind schedule, the time can be made up by dropping these activities. This extra time that is built into the schedule is called
contingency time, buffer, or reserve time.

Reassigning Resources

Activities that are not on the critical path that have free float can be delayed without delaying the end date of the project if they
start by the late start date. Project managers can divert some resources from activities with free float to activities on the critical path
without delaying the completion of the project.

Changing Scope

The unit cost of work to be performed on a project is calculated at the beginning of the project based on the execution strategy of
the project to meet the project completion date. If the project completion date is moved up, then the unit cost of work will likely
increase. Conversely, a project team may be able to save money by extending the project end date. With more time, the project

8.4.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24701
team may be able to schedule activities in such a way to reduce their costs. For example, an activity requiring overtime to be paid
can now pay the labor at normal rates, saving the overtime premium. Changing elements of the master schedule means a change in
scope. Scope changes often affect costs and require agreement by the parties who signed the original scope documents.

Additional Resources

Another option is to allocate funds that can be used to add resources if necessary. Available resources can be increased by adding
overtime to existing resource calendars or by hiring additional contract workers or renting additional equipment.

  Adding Resources to the Dreamliner Project

  When Boeing sales of the new 878 Dreamliner Airplane exceeded expectations, contractors who were building the plane were
  asked to increase production while maintaining all quality and safety requirements. All contractors involved in the plane
  production were affected by this change.

One project team was responsible for developing and delivering training to the new employees who would be building the fuselage
of the Dreamliner. Training for new employees had to be complete three months early and the project team developed an execution
strategy to meet the new deadlines. The project had a month of float, so the project accelerated the schedule by two months. The
team authorized overtime from forty to fifty hours a week for team members working activities on the critical path. The project
team leased additional space and hired contractors to perform selected work packages on the critical path and delayed the
production of library quality documents until after the critical dates on the project. Authorizing overtime and hiring contractors
added a 15 percent cost to the project. Overtime and the procurement of additional contract help was authorized only for work
packages on the critical path because work not on the critical path would not accelerate the schedule. A concrete contractor on a
construction project may be scheduled to lay one thousand yards of a building foundation by pouring one hundred yards a day for
ten days. Foundations are on the critical path, and because of rain, the project is three days behind schedule. The project manager
asked the concrete contractor to bring in a second crew and pour two hundred yards a day, and the work is complete in five days.

Changing Quality

Another option for accelerating the schedule is the changing of the quality specifications of the product. This is usually done as a
scope change.

  Making Up Time by Reducing Quality

  At a midwestern university, a new building was being built, but it was behind schedule. To speed up the installation of the
  heating and cooling equipment, it was decided to make the zones of control larger, which meant that each floor would have
  fewer points where temperature was sensed and controlled and fewer air flow control boxes. The contract did not specify the
  zone size or how many control points were required on each floor of the building, so this change did not require a change in
  scope. As a result, when the sun is coming in on the south side of the building, those rooms get as much heat or cooling as the
  rooms on the north side, so they are often too hot. If the single temperature controller on each floor is set to a lower
  temperature, the rooms on the north side are too cold. The client for the building did not realize this change had been made
  until they were in the building for several months and the project was completed.

Key Takeaways
    Progress can be measured by determining the percentage of resources expended, completion of activities by scheduled dates,
    milestones achieved, or fraction of activities accomplished. Standards used to measure progress, particularly when partial
    payment to contractors is concerned, should be specified in contract documents.
    Resource leveling is reallocating people and equipment to remove periods of overuse or underuse.
    Unplanned delays and costs can be anticipated by including contingency time and budget amounts where needed to keep the
    schedule on time. Resource allocation and resource calendars should be examined to determine if a resource is overcommitted.
    Free float can be used to delay noncritical activities that use the same resource to allocate its time more evenly. If it is necessary
    to accelerate the schedule, activities that are not on the critical path can be delayed using their free float and their resources can

8.4.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24701
    be moved to activities on the critical path to complete them sooner. Contingency resources can be committed to speeding up the
    activities. If necessary, the scope can be changed to bring in additional resources or lower the quality.

Exercises

 1. Accelerating the project schedule is also known as ________ the project.
 2. Extra amounts of time and money that are built into the schedule to buffer against delays and extra costs are called

    ___________ time or funds.
 3. What might be a drawback to a reporting method that stated project progress as a fraction of activities completed?
 4. How does a manager accelerate a project by using free float?

Progress Reports

From the client's point of view, describe what you think would be the advantages of each type of progress measurement.

References

Cringely, R. X., Triumph of the Nerds, June 1996, http://www.pbs.org/nerds/part2.html (accessed July 27, 2009).

This page titled 8.4: Managing the Schedule is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

8.4.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24701
8.5: Project Scheduling Software

  Learning Objectives

    1. Describe the relationship between the choice of software and project complexity.
    2. Identify the features that should be considered when selecting software for project management.

Low-complexity projects can be managed with lists of activities on paper or by using an outline in word processing or spreadsheet
software. This software is inadequate for tracking complex projects. Fortunately, there are several dedicated software programs that
keep track of the complex relationships between activities and resources.

Appropriate to Project Complexity

Simple projects can be tracked using general purpose word processing and spreadsheet software like those available in Microsoft
Office or OpenOffice. Medium-complexity projects benefit from dedicated project management software such as Microsoft Project
and OpenProject. Complex projects require software that can track the interactions of thousands of tasks and produce sophisticated
reports such as Oracle's P6.

Features

There are dozens of computer software programs available with a wide range of prices. Some open source software programs are
free, but others cost up to a thousand dollars. There are several considerations for selecting a project management software besides
price.

Currently Used Software

Use software that is already in use and with which most team members are already familiar. If software that is used by most team
members is appropriate to the complexity of your project, it is the default choice. It is also valuable to know what software is used
by key vendors or project partners so files can be exchanged electronically in the same format.

Basic Features

Any project management software that is selected must have the ability to track and display basic features such as the following:

    Durations
    Relationships
    Milestones
    Start and end dates
    Resource calendars
    Graphic displays using Gantt and network charts

Collaboration

Team members should be able to view the project schedule. Some software products require the use of expensive proprietary
software that runs on the company's server and that will allow several different team members to use the same schedule and
restricts the use of the software to team members who have access to the company's computer system. Other software products use
a server on the Internet that is open to team members and vendors who have valid passwords.

Advanced Features

For more complex projects, look for advanced features, such as the following:

    Issue tracking that tracks problems, actions, and resolutions
    Project portfolio management that tracks and compares groups of related projects
    Automatic resource leveling and alerts when a resource is overscheduled
    Document management feature that tracks contracts, bids, scope changes, and incidents

8.5.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24702
Key Takeaways
    Medium- to high-complexity projects usually require the use of software that is designed specifically for managing projects.
    Features to look for when choosing project management software include (1) compatibility with existing software at the
    company or its vendors, (2) basic features for managing medium-complexity projects, (3) a method for collaboration between
    team members, and (4) if needed, advanced features for managing multiple projects.

Exercises

 1. When choosing software, the new software should be __________ with the software currently in use and with the software used
    by vendors and partners.

 2. How does the complexity of the project affect the choice of software used to manage it?
 3. What is an example of an advanced feature that is available for managing the most complex projects? Explain why this feature

    is needed for complex projects.

Learning New Software

Describe the methods that work best for you when you learn a new computer program, such as self-directed exploration, a
textbook, self-paced tutorials, or organized classes with an instructor. If you wanted to require that all the members of your ten-
person team use project management software that was new to all of them, how would you recommend that they learn the
software?

This page titled 8.5: Project Scheduling Software is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

8.5.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24702
8.6: Exercises

Exercises at the end of the chapter are designed to strengthen your understanding and retention of the information recently acquired
in the chapter.

Essay Questions

Write several paragraphs to provide more in-depth analysis and consideration when answering the following questions.

 1. Compare the Gantt and Network charts. Describe the uses of each type of chart.
 2. Choose a project with which you are familiar (it could be a simple project like John's move) and describe how the project could

    be crashed using each of the methods described in the text.
 3. Describe what size project could be done using general purpose word processing and spreadsheet software and how you could

    structure the data in those documents to make it easier to transfer that data into a project management software, if necessary.

Discussion

The exercises in this section are designed to promote exchange of information among students in the classroom or in an online
discussion. The exercises are more open ended, which means that what you find might be completely different from what your
classmates find, and you can all benefit by sharing what you have learned.

 1. Describe a personal experience where the average amount of work required of you was appropriate but the scheduling of that
    work was so uneven that there were periods when you could not get the work done on time and other periods when you did not
    have enough to do. Describe how you would have used resource leveling and free float to distribute your workload if you had
    been the manager. Consider the situations and solutions offered by classmates and suggest other ways they could have
    distributed their workloads more evenly.

 2. Describe your experience working with a spreadsheet to manage data such as expenses or activities. How would the ability to
    treat them like data by sorting and filtering help you to prepare reports?

This page titled 8.6: Exercises is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

8.6.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24703
8.7: Software and Technology Exercises

  Learning Objectives

    1. Use dedicated project management software to manage changes to the work breakdown structure (WBS).
    2. Use the outline and subtotal features in a spreadsheet to create a low-complexity WBS.
    3. Use the outline feature in a word processor to create a low-complexity WBS.

Using Dedicated Project Management Software

General purpose software such as word processing or spreadsheet programs are not capable of managing changes in relationships
between activities or determining the critical path. They might suffice for the simplest projects, but more sophisticated interactive
programs are needed for determining the effects of changes to interconnected activities. Small projects performed by groups with
limited budgets can use open-source software such as OpenProj.
To complete this exercise, you must have permission to download and install software on your computer or use a computer that has
OpenProj installed on it.

Install OpenProj

Complete the exercise by following these instructions:

 1. Open a web browser and go to openproj.org. The program may be downloaded from this site, as shown in Figure 8.18 "Single
    User and Collaborative Versions".

                                      Figure 8.18 Single User and Collaborative Versions

Source: Courtesy of Serena Software.

2. OpenProj is an open-source project management software that resembles Microsoft Project.
3. Click the Download now button. You must have administrative privileges to install software on the computer you are using.
4. Click the arrow next to the Save button, and then save this program to your computer in a location where you can find it again.
5. Open Windows explorer or your file finder program, locate the file you downloaded, and then double-click on it. Run the

   installation program and follow the directions on the screen.

                                                          Figure 8.19 Single User and Collaborative Versions

   Source: Courtesy of Serena Software.

6. Open Windows explorer or your file finder program, locate the file you downloaded, and then double-click on it. Run the
   installation program and follow the directions on the screen.

7. After OpenProj is installed, start the program. Choose to create a new project. In the New Project dialog box, in the Project
   Name box, type Ch08StudentName replacing StudentName with your name without spaces.

                                      8.7.1                                               https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24704
8. In the Manager box, enter your name. The current date will display in the Start Date box by default. Your date will differ from
   the example shown in Figure 8.20 "Identify the Project and Its Manager".

                                                              Figure 8.20 Identify the Project and Its Manager

    Source: Courtesy of Serena Software.

 9. Capture this screen. Paste it into a blank word processing document named Ch08OpenProjStudentName and save the file using
    the Word 2003 .doc file format.

10. In OpenProj, click OK. Leave this program running for use in the next section.

Import WBS from Excel

 1. Use Windows Explorer to navigate to the location where the supplemental files for this chapter are stored. Download the Excel
    spreadsheet Ch08JohnsMove.xls and then open it in Excel.

 2. Select cells B3 through C36, as shown in Figure 8.21 "List of Activities and Their Durations Selected in a Spreadsheet".
 3. Copy this range of cells to the clipboard. (Use CTRL+C in Windows.)
 4. Switch to the OpenProj window. In row 1, below Name, click the empty box. Paste the content. (Use CTRL+V in Windows.)

    The activities and their durations are placed in the project window, as shown in Figure 8.22 "List of Activities and Their
    Durations Pasted into OpenProj".

                                              Figure 8.22 List of Activities and Their Durations Pasted into OpenProj

   Source: Courtesy of Serena Software.

5. Capture this screen and paste it into Ch08OpenProjStudentName.doc.
6. In OpenProj, move the pointer to the vertical line to the right of the Start column heading. Drag this line to the left to minimize

   the width of the Start column. Repeat this process to minimize the width of the End column to minimize both columns, as
   shown in Figure 8.23 "Reduce Size of Start and End Columns".

                                                          Figure 8.23 Reduce Size of Start and End Columns
   Source: Courtesy of Serena Software.

7. In the first column, click the cell with a 2 in it. Press and hold the Shift key. In the first column, click the cell with a 5 to select
   rows 2 through 5.

8.7.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24704
 8. On the toolbar, click the Indent button. The four selected activities are indented as subordinate activities, and the activity in the
    row above becomes the group name. A black group symbol spans the group in the chart at the right, as shown in Figure 8.24
    "Group Defined".

                                                                           Figure 8.24 Group Defined
    Source: Courtesy of Serena Software.
 9. In the Predecessor column, in rows 3-5, type 2, 3, and 2.
    The Gantt chart at the right adjusts the positions of the bars automatically and connects them with arrows to indicate their
    finish-start relationship, as shown in Figure 8.25 "List of Activities and Their Durations Selected in a Spreadsheet". Notice that
    Saturdays and Sundays are gray. They are not included as workdays. This will be addressed in a later step.

                                             Figure 8.25 List of Activities and Their Durations Selected in a Spreadsheet
    Source: Courtesy of Serena Software.
10. Repeat this process to indent the activities under the Prepacking, Packing, Moving, Unpacking, and Project Closeout headings.
11. Indent activities 16-19 another level to make them subactivities under Pack Apartment.
12. Fill in the remaining predecessors. Refer to the Predecessors column on the John's Move worksheet or Figure 8.25 "List of
    Activities and Their Durations Selected in a Spreadsheet" . Notice where two predecessors are indicated, they are separated by a
    semicolon. Notice that activities that span the weekend days are extended by two days, as shown in Figure 8.26 "Bar Chart
    Showing Durations and Relationships".

                                                      Figure 8.26 Bar Chart Showing Durations and Relationships
    Source: Courtesy of Serena Software.
13. Capture this screen and paste it into Ch08OpenProjStudentName.doc.

8.7.3                                                                                                            https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24704
14. In OpenProj, on the menu bar, click File and then click Save. Navigate to a folder where you save your files for this class and
    save the project file. Notice the project file name extension is .pod. Leave the project open.

15. Review your work in OpenProj and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

Element                    Best                             Adequate                       Poor

File name                  Ch08StudentName.pod              Ch08StudentName.pod            Used a different name

Use dedicated project      Activities imported from         Same as Best                   Mistakes with multiple
management software to     Excel; correct groups; correct                                  predecessors; incorrect
manage changes to the WBS  predecessors; dates will differ                                 groupings
                           from figures

16. Review your work in Ch08OpenProjStudentName.doc and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

Element                    Best                             Adequate                       Poor

File name                  Ch08OpenProjStudentName.d        Same name saved as .docx file  Used a different name
                           oc

Use dedicated project      Three screen captures that       Same as Best                   Missing screens or lack of
management software to     show the development of the                                     student name in first screen
manage changes to the WBS  WBS in OpenProj

17. Save the files and submit them as directed by the instructor.

Using the Subtotal and Outline Features in Excel 2007 for a Low-Complexity Work Breakdown
Structure

Some advanced spreadsheet programs such as Microsoft Excel can sort tables of text and data. If the text is used as category labels,
the sorting feature can be used to bring all the same type of expenses together, after which they can be subtotaled by category. The
individual rows in each category can be hidden, and the category text and a subtotal for each column that contains numeric data
such as durations or costs are displayed. This feature may be used to manage the costs or durations associated with each item in a
work breakdown structure for a low-complexity project.

Create a WBS using the subtotal and outline features of Microsoft Excel 2007:

 1. Navigate to the folder where the student files for this chapter are located and then open Ch08JohnsMove.xls. Do not save the
    file--it will not be submitted.

 2. Observe that a group name has been given to each row of the WBS in column E.
 3. Click cell E1, and then type your name.
 4. On the Data tab, in the Outline group, click Subtotal. The Subtotal dialog box displays.
 5. Under At each change in click the arrow button. The program shows a list of column headings, as shown in Figure 8.27

    "Subtotal Dialog Box".
 6. On the list of column headings, click Group. A subtotal is calculated each time the label in this column changes.
 7. In the Subtotal dialog box, under Use function, click the arrow button and then click Sum.
 8. In the Subtotal dialog box, under Add subtotal to, next to Duration, click the check box. Click to remove any other check boxes

    under Add subtotal to if necessary. The durations will be summed for each group. Refer to Figure 8.28 "Subtotal Dialog Box Set
    to Sum the Durations for Each Type of Group".
 9. Capture this screen. Open a blank word processing document and save it as Ch08WBSExcel2007StudentName.doc using the
    Word 2003 file format. On the first line, type your name and the current date. Below the date, paste the screen capture. Leave
    the file open.
10. In Ch08JohnsMove.xls, in the Subtotal dialog box, click OK. Subtotals are inserted below each type of group label, as shown in
    Figure 8.29 "Subtotal Dialog Box Set to Sum the Durations for Each Type of Group".
11. Capture this screen and then paste it into Ch08WBSExcel2007StudentName.doc.

                                                8.7.4                                      https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24704
12. In Ch08JohnsMove.xls, at the upper left corner of the worksheet, click the number 2. The detail of each type of group is hidden
    and the subtotals are displayed, as shown in Figure 8.30 "WBS Subtotaled and Collapsed".

13. Capture this screen and then paste it into Ch08WBSExcel2007StudentName.doc.
14. At the upper left corner of the worksheet, click 3. The outline is expanded.
15. On the Data tab, in the Outline group, click Subtotal. In the Subtotal dialog box, click the Remove All button. The subtotals and

    outline are removed.
16. Close the spreadsheet. Do not save the changes.
17. Review your work and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

Element                       Best                             Adequate      Poor

File name                     Ch08WBSExcel2007StudentN ame.doc Same as Best  Chapter number or student
                                                                             name missing

Use the outline and subtotal  Name and date in first row;      Same as Best  Name not in first line; name
features in a spreadsheet to  three screen captures that show                not shown in screen captures
create a low-complexity work  the use of subtotal and outline
breakdown structure

18. Save the file and submit it as directed by the instructor.

Using the Outline Feature in Word 2007 for a Low-Complexity Work Breakdown Structure

Advanced word processing software includes an outlining feature that allows the user to work in an outline format with collapsible
headings. This feature may be used to define a work breakdown structure in a low-complexity project.

Create a WBS using an outline in Microsoft Word 2007:

 1. Open MS Word 2007 and open a blank document. Save the file as Ch08WBSStudentName.docx using the Word 2007 document
    format that uses the .docx file extensions.

 2. On the Home tab, in the Styles group, scroll to display the Title option, and then click Title.
 3. Type John's Move and then press Enter. The text is formatted using the title style as shown in Figure 8.31 "Title Style".
 4. On the second line, type your name and then press Enter.
 5. On the third line, type the date and then press Enter. Notice that the title style does not apply to the following lines. The

    program's default style is called the normal style.
 6. On the Home tab, in the Styles group, scroll and click Heading 1. Type Plan Move and then press Enter. The Heading 1 style is

    applied.
 7. On the Home tab, in the Styles group, click Heading 2. Type Contact Dion and Carlita and press Enter. Repeat this process to

    enter the following items formatted as Heading 2. Refer to Figure 8.32 "Title, Body Text, Heading 1, and Heading 2".

        Host Planning Lunch
        Develop and Distribute Schedule
        Make Hotel Arrangement in Atlanta
        Prepacking

 8. Open a new blank word processing document. On the first line, type your name and the date. Save the new document as
    Ch08OutlineWord2007StudentName.doc using the Word 2003 file format.

 9. Switch to Ch08WBSStudentName.docx. Capture the screen that shows the outline at this point in the development of the
    exercise. Paste the screen into Ch08OutlineWord2007StudentName.doc. Save the file but leave it open.

10. In Ch08WBSStudentName.docx, at the end of the line that begins with Contact Dion and Carlita, click to place the insertion
    point and then press Enter.

11. Type Phone numbers are: Dion 555-0125, Carlita 555-0234. Observe that the additional text is formatted in normal style,
    similar to the name and date, as shown in Figure 8.33 "Screen Capture and Phone Numbers Added".

12. Select the line that begins with Pre-packing. On the Home tab, in the Styles group, click Heading 1. The Heading 1 style is
    applied.

                                    8.7.5                                    https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24704
13. Use this process to fill in the remaining items in the WBS, as shown in Figure 8.34 "WBS with Three Levels", using heading
    styles 1, 2, and 3.

14. On the View tab, in the Document Views group, click the Outline button. Change the zoom, if necessary, to display all the
    document text, as shown in Figure 8.35 "WBS in Outline View". Each heading is also formatted with a corresponding outline
    level of the same number.

15. Capture this screen and paste it into Ch08OutlineWord2007StudentName.doc.
16. In Ch08WBSStudentName.docx, on the Outlining tab, in the Outline Tools group, click the Show Level button, and then click

    Level 2. Text that is formatted with Headings 1 and 2 are displayed while the title, normal text, and lower-level headings are
    not. Plus signs indicate the presence of hidden text, as shown in Figure 8.36 "Display of Levels 1 and 2".
17. Capture this screen and paste it into Ch08OutlineWord2007StudentName.doc. Save Ch08OutlineWord2007StudentName.doc.
18. In Ch08WBSStudentName.docx, on the Outlining tab, in the Close group, click the Close Outline View button. Save the
    document.
19. Review your work and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

Element                       Best                              Adequate            Poor

File name                     Ch08OutlineWord2007Student Same as Best but in .docx  Chapter number or student
                                                                                    name missing
                              Name.doc                          format

Use the outline feature in a  Name and date on first line;      Same as Best        Missing information or screens
word processor to create a    three screen captures that show
low-complexity WBS            the development and use of the
                              WBS in Word 2007's outline
                              form using Heading styles 1,
                              2, and 3

File name                     Ch08WBSStudentName.docx Same as Best                  Chapter number or student
                                                                                    name missing

Use the outline feature in a  Title style applied to the first  Same as Best        Incorrect styles applied to
word processor to create a    line; normal style used for                           some lines
low-complexity WBS            name, date, and phone
                              numbers; heading styles 1, 2,
                              and 3 used as directed; can be
                              collapsed and expanded using
                              the Outline view

20. Save the files and submit them as directed by the instructor.

This page titled 8.7: Software and Technology Exercises is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                        8.7.6                                       https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24704
CHAPTER OVERVIEW

9: Estimating and Managing Costs

  9.1: Estimating Costs
  9.2: Managing the Budget
  9.3: Exercises
  9.4: Software and Technology Exercise
This page titled 9: Estimating and Managing Costs is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                                                                              1
9.1: Estimating Costs

  Learning Objectives

    1. Describe methods of estimating costs.
    2. Identify the effects of project phase and complexity on the choice of estimating method.
    3. Describe the method of combining cost estimates with a schedule to create a budget.

Estimating Costs to Compare and Select Projects

During the conceptual phase when project selection occurs, economic factors are an important consideration when choosing
between competing projects. To compare the simple paybacks or internal rates of return between projects, an estimate of the cost of
each project is made. The estimates must be accurate enough so that the comparisons are meaningful, but the amount of time and
resources used to make the estimates should be appropriate to the size and complexity of the project. The methods used to estimate
the cost of the project during the selection phase are generally faster and consume fewer resources than those used to create
detailed estimates in later phases. They rely more on the expert judgment of experienced managers who can make accurate
estimates with less detailed information. Estimates in the earliest stages of project selection are usually made using estimates based
from previous projects that can be adjusted--scaled--to match the size and complexity of the current project or by applying
standardized formulas.

Analogous Estimate

An estimate that is based on other project estimates is an analogous estimate. If a similar project cost a certain amount, then it is
reasonable to assume that the current project will cost about the same. Few projects are exactly the same size and complexity, so
the estimate must be adjusted upward or downward to account for the difference. The selection of projects that are similar and the
amount of adjustment needed is up to the judgment of the person who makes the estimate. Normally, this judgment is based on
many years of experience estimating projects, including incorrect estimates that were learning experiences for the expert.

  Analogous Estimate for John's Move

  In the John's move example, John asked a friend for advice about the cost of his move. His friend replied, "I moved from an
  apartment a little smaller than yours last year and the distance was about the same. I did it with a fourteen-foot truck. It cost
  about $575 for the truck rental, pads, hand truck, rope, boxes, and gas." Because of the similarity of the projects, John's initial
  estimate of the cost of the move was less than $700 and he decided that the cost would be affordable and the project could go
  forward.

Less experienced managers who are required to make analogous estimates can look through the documentation that is available
from previous projects. If those projects were evaluated using the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index (DPCI), the manager can
quickly identify projects that have similar profiles to the project under consideration even if those projects were managed by other
people. Comparing the original estimates with the final project costs on several previous projects with the same DPCI ratings gives
a less experienced manager the perspective that it would take many years to acquire by trial and error. It also provides references
the manager can use to justify the estimate.

Parametric Estimate

If the project consists of activities that are common to many other projects, average costs are available per unit. For example, if you
ask a construction company how much it would cost to build a standard office building, they will ask for the size of the building in
square feet and the city in which the building will be built. From these two factors--size and location--the company's estimator
can predict the cost of the building. Factors like size and location are parameters--measurable factors that can be used in an
equation to calculate a result. The estimator knows the average cost per square foot of a typical office building and adjustments for
local labor costs. Other parameters such as quality of finishes are used to further refine the estimate. Estimates that are calculated
by multiplying measured parameters by cost-per-unit values are parametric estimates.

9.1.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24705
 Parametric Estimate for John's Move

 To estimate the size of the truck needed for John's move, the parameter used by a truck rental company is the number of
 bedrooms, as shown below.

                                               Figure 9.1 Number of Bedrooms Used for Parametric Cost Estimate

The moving company assumes that the number of bedrooms is the important parameter in determining how big a truck is needed
for a move. For John's move, he has a one-bedroom apartment, so he chooses the fourteen-foot truck. Once the size is determined,
other parameters, such as distance and days, are used to estimate the cost of the truck rental.

Estimating Costs to Initiate Projects

Once the project is selected, more accurate estimates are often needed to raise funds and agree on contracts with vendors in the
initiation phase.

  Estimate During the Initiation Phase of John's Move

  John recalled that his friend also told him how tiring it was to do all the packing, loading, and driving himself, and some items
  were damaged when the load shifted inside the truck during the trip. John decides to call in favors from two friends, Dion and
  Carlita, to help him pack in Chicago and to hire some of the skilled labor like that needed to load the truck properly.

Vendor Bid Analysis

If services or products will be provided by vendors, the cost of those services can be determined by issuing a request for proposal
(RFP). The RFP describes the work, service, or product to be provided by the vendor and the quality level required. The RFP is sent
to a list of vendors who are qualified--meet standards of reliability and capability--to perform this type of work. They respond
with a proposal for completing the work described in the RFP, including an estimate of the cost. Some government organizations
are required to use the qualified vendor with the lowest bid. Other organizations are not bound to take the lowest bid but are usually
required to justify their reasons for not doing so.

  Using RFPs to Make Estimates on John's Move

  John wants to find out how much it would cost to hire a skilled crew to load and secure the furniture in the truck and then have
  another crew from the same company meet him in Atlanta to unload the truck and help him unpack. He is not sure if any
  companies offer this option, so he decides to ask three moving companies for bids. He also decides to ask for bids on a
  standard move that includes all phases of packing, loading, transportation, and unloading as a comparison to see if his cost-
  saving plan is worth the extra effort.

The project management team can review the responses by several vendors to the RFP to determine if their estimate of the cost of
that aspect of the project is close to the estimate made during the project selection stage. If the estimates by the vendors are much
higher than expected, and if the project cannot be completed for the cost that was used to select the project, the selection decision
might have to be reconsidered. Reconsidering the selection of the project should take into consideration the economic ratings of the
competing projects that were not chosen and who the project champions are for the projects that would be affected.

9.1.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24705
Some vendors may suggest an alternative way to meet the objective of the RFP in a more cost-effective manner that does not match
the specifics of the RFP. Such alternatives can reduce costs if they are acceptable.

Bottom-Up Estimating

The most accurate and time-consuming estimating method is to identify the cost of each item in each activity of the schedule,
including labor and materials. If you view the project schedule as a hierarchy where the general descriptions of tasks are at the top
and the lower levels become more detailed, finding the price of each item at the lowest level and then summing them to determine
the cost of higher levels is called bottom-up estimating.

 Bottom-Up Estimate for John's Move

 After evaluating the bids by the moving companies, John decides the savings are worth his time if he can get the packing done
 with the help of his friends. He decides to prepare a detailed estimate of costs for packing materials and use of a rental truck.
 He looks up the prices for packing materials and truck rental costs on company Web sites and prepares a detailed list of items,
 quantities, and costs, as shown below.

 Figure 9.2 Detailed Cost Estimate

Category           Description           Quantity         Unit Price  Cost
Packing Materials  Small Boxes           10               $1.70       $17.00

Packing Materials  Medium Boxes          15               $2.35       $35.25
Packing Materials                                         $3.00       $21.00
Packing Materials  Large Boxes           7                $3.75       $26.25

                   Extra Large Boxes     7

Packing Materials  Short Hanger Boxes    3                $7.95       $23.85
Packing Materials                                         $3.85       $7.70
Packing Materials  Box Tape              2                $1.50       $3.00
Packing Materials                                         $2.95       $5.90
                   Markers               2

                   Mattress/Spring Bags 2

Packing Materials  Lift Straps per Pair  1                $24.95      $24.95
Packing Materials                                         $19.95      $19.95
Packing Materials  Bubble Wrap           1                $7.95       $31.80

                   Furniture Pads        4

Truck              Rental                                             $400.00
Truck                                                                 $45.00
                   Gas at 10mpg          200              $2.25

The detail can be rolled up--subtotaled--to display less detail. This process is made easier using computer software. On
projects with low complexity, the cost estimates can be done on spreadsheet software.

  Rolling Up a Detailed Cost Estimate for John's Move

  For example, the subtotal feature could be used in Excel and collapsed to show the subtotals for the two categories of costs,
  as shown below.

                                                   9.1.3              https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24705
                                                             Figure 9.3 Sum of Detailed Costs by Type
On larger projects, software that manages schedules can also manage costs and display costs by activity and by category.

Activity-Based Estimates

An activity can have costs from more than one vendor plus costs for labor and materials from internal sources. Detailed
estimates from all sources can be reorganized so those costs that are associated with a particular activity can be grouped by
adding the activity code to the detailed estimate, as shown in Figure 9.4 "Detailed Costs Associated with Activities".

Figure 9.4 Detailed Costs Associated with Activities

Category  Description             Activity  Quantity    Unit Price  Cost

Packing Materials Small Boxes     2a               10   $1.70       $17.00

Packing Materials Medium Boxes    2a               15   $2.35       $35.25

Packing Materials Large Boxes     2a               7    $3.00       $21.00

Packing Materials Extra Large Boxes 2a             7    $3.75       $26.25

Packing Materials Short Hanger Boxes 2a 3               $7.95       $23.85

Packing Materials Box Tape        2a               2    $2.85       $7.70

Packing Materials Markers         2a               2    $1.50       $3.00

Packing Materials Mattress/Spring Bags 2a 2             $2.95       $5.90

Packing Materials Lift Straps per Pair 2a          1    $24.95      $24.95

Packing Materials Bubble Wrap     2a               1    $19.95      $19.95

Packing Materials Furniture Pads  2a               4    $7.95       $31.80

Truck     Rental                  2b                                $400.00

Truck     Gas at 10mpg            2b               200  $2.25       $45.00

The detailed cost estimates can be sorted by activity and then subtotaled by activity to determine the cost for each activity.

Establishing a Budget

Once the cost of each activity is estimated, it is possible to determine how much money is needed for each group of tasks and
for the whole project.

Cost of Tasks

The cost of each group of activities of the project can be estimated by summing the costs of the components of each activity in
the group. This process of subtotaling costs by category or activity is called cost aggregation.

                                            9.1.4                   https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24705
Budget Timeline

Because the costs are associated with activities and each activity has a start date and a duration, it is possible to calculate how
much money needs to be spent by any particular date during the project. The money needed to pay for a project is usually
transferred to the project account shortly before it is needed. These transfers must be timed so that the money is there to pay for
each activity without causing a delay in the start of the activity. If the money is transferred too far in advance, the organization
will lose the opportunity to use the money somewhere else, or they will have to pay unnecessary interest charges if the money is
borrowed. A schedule of money transfers is created that should match the need to pay for the activities. The process of matching
the schedule of transfers with the schedule of activity payments is called reconciliation. Refer to Figure 9.5 "Fund Transfers and
Expenditures" that shows the costs of ten major activities in a project. Funds are transferred into the project account four times.
Notice that during most of the project, there were more funds available than were spent except at activity 6 when all the
available funds were spent.

                                                           Figure 9.5 Fund Transfers and Expenditures

In the project budget profile shown in Figure 9.5 "Fund Transfers and Expenditures", there is no margin for error if the total of
the first six activities exceeds the amount of funding at that point in the project.

Contractual agreements with vendors often require partial payment of their costs during the project. Those contracts can be
managed more conveniently if the unit of measure for partial completion is the same as that used for cost budgeting. For
example, if a contractor is pouring concrete for a large project, their contract may call for partial payment after 25 percent of the
total volume of concrete is poured as determined by cubic yards of concrete.

Key Takeaways
    Analogous estimating scales an estimate from a similar project to match the current project. Parametric estimating multiplies
    a standard cost-per-unit value by the number of units in the project. Bids from contractors can be compared to estimate
    costs. Bottom-up estimating determines the cost of each detail and aggregates them to determine activity cost estimates.
    During the project selection and approval stage, rough estimates are used that are usually obtained using analogous and
    parametric methods. Vendor bid analysis and detailed bottom-up estimates are used in the initiation phase to estimate project
    costs.

9.1.5  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24705
        Detailed estimates are associated with activities and aggregated during the planning phase to create an activity-based budget.
        Funding transfers are arranged to reconcile money spent to money from funding sources in a timely manner.

   Exercises

     1. An estimate that is obtained by scaling up an estimate from a similar project is a(n) ___________ estimate.
     2. An estimate that uses standard costs per unit such as price per square foot or price per cubic yard is a ____________

        estimate.
     3. Matching the transfer of funds into the project account with the money spent is called __________________.

    Estimates

    Consider a project in which you have been involved that used an estimating technique to provide numbers for the conceptual
    plan. Briefly describe the type of project and identify the estimating method used.

This page titled 9.1: Estimating Costs is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

9.1.6  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24705
9.2: Managing the Budget

  Learning Objectives

    1. Describe methods to manage cash flow.
    2. Describe the terms and relationships of budget factors used in earned value analysis.
    3. Calculate and interpret budget and schedule variances.
    4. Calculate and interpret the schedule performance index and the cost performance index.
    5. Calculate and interpret estimates to complete the project.
    6. Calculate the revised final budget.

Projects seldom go according to plan in every detail. It is necessary for the project manager to be able to identify when costs are
varying from the budget and to manage those variations.

Managing Cash Flow

If the total amount spent on a project is equal to or less than the amount budgeted, the project can still be in trouble if the funding
for the project is not available when it is needed. There is a natural tension between the financial people in an organization, who do
not want to pay for the use of money that is just sitting in a checking account, and the project manager, who wants to be sure that
there is enough money available to pay for project expenses. The financial people prefer to keep the company's money working in
other investments until the last moment before transferring it to the project account. The contractors and vendors have similar
concerns, and they want to get paid as soon as possible so they can put the money to work in their own organizations. The project
manager would like to have as much cash available as possible to use if activities exceed budget expectations.

Contingency Reserves

Most projects have something unexpected occur that increases costs above the original estimates. If estimates are rarely exceeded,
the estimating method should be reviewed because the estimates are too high. It is not possible to predict which activities cost more
than expected, but it is reasonable to assume that some of them will be. Estimating the likelihood of such events is part of risk
analysis, which is discussed in more detail in a later chapter.

Instead of overestimating each cost, money is budgeted for dealing with unplanned but statistically predictable cost increases.
Funds allocated for this purpose are called contingency reserves (Project Management Institute, Inc., 2008). Because it is likely that
this money will be spent, it is part of the total budget for the project. If this fund is adequate to meet the unplanned expenses, then
the project will complete within the budget.

Management Reserves

If something occurs during the project that requires a change in the project scope, money may be needed to deal with the situation
before a change in scope can be negotiated with the project sponsor or client. It could be an opportunity as well as a challenge.
Money can be made available to the project to be used at the discretion of the manager to meet needs that would change the scope
of the project. These funds are called management reserves. Unlike contingency reserves, they are not likely to be spent and are not
part of the project's budget baseline, but they can be included in the total project budget (Project Management Institute, Inc., 2008).

Evaluating the Budget During the Project

A project manager must regularly compare the amount of money spent with the budgeted amount and report this information to
managers and stakeholders. It is necessary to establish an understanding of how this progress will be measured and reported.

  Reporting Budget Progress on John's Move

  In the John's move example, he estimated that the move would cost about $1,500 and take about sixteen days. Eight days into
  the project, John has spent $300. John tells his friends that the project is going well because he is halfway through the project
  but has only spent a fifth of his budget. John's friend Carlita points out that his report is not sufficient because he did not
  compare the amount spent to the budgeted amount for the activities that should be done by the eighth day.

9.2.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24706
As John's friend points out, a budget report must compare the amount spent with the amount that is expected to be spent by that
point in the project. Basic measures such as percentage of activities completed, percentage of measurement units completed, and
percentage of budget spent are adequate for less complex projects, but more sophisticated techniques are used for projects with
higher complexity.

Earned Value Management

A method that is widely used for medium- and high-complexity projects is the earned value management (EVM) method. EVM is a
method of comparing the budgeted and actual costs of a project periodically during the project. It combines the scheduled activities
with detailed cost estimates of each activity. It allows for partial completion of an activity if some of the detailed costs associated
with the activity have been paid but others have not. The earned value analysis method compares the anticipated cost of work that
is scheduled to be done at a given point in time against what has been done and how much it actually cost.

The Budgeted Cost of Work and Planned Value

The budgeted cost of work scheduled (BCWS) comprises the detailed cost estimates for each activity in the project. The amount of
work that should have been done by a particular date is the planned value (PV). These terms are used interchangeably by some
sources, but the planned value term is used in formulas to refer to the sum of the budgeted cost of work up to a particular point in
the project, so we will make that distinction in the definitions in this text for clarity.

 Planned Value on Day Six of John's Move

 On day six of the project, John should have taken his friends to lunch and purchased the packing materials. The portion of the
 BCWS that should have been done by that date (the planned value) is listed in Figure 9.6 "Planned Value for Lunch and
 Packing Materials". This is the planned value for day six of the project.

Figure 9.6 Planned Value for Lunch and Packing Materials

Description                     Quantity                         Cost
                                                                 $45.00
Lunch                           3                                $17.00
                                                                 $35.25
Small Boxes                     10                               $21.00
                                                                 $26.25
Medium Boxes                    15                               $23.85
                                                                 $7.70
Large Boxes                     7                                $3.00
                                                                 $5.90
Extra Large Boxes               7                                $24.95
                                                                 $19.95
Short Hanger Boxes              3                                $31.80
                                                                 $261.65
Box Tape                        2

Markers                         2

Mattress/Spring Bags            2

Lift Straps per Pair            1

Bubble Wrap                     1

Furniture Pads                  4

                      Quantity  Total                     Cost

                                                          9.2.2           https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24706
Budgeted Cost of Work Performed and Earned Value

The budgeted cost of work performed (BCWP) is the budgeted cost of work scheduled that has been done. If you sum the BCWP
values up to that point in the project schedule, you have the earned value (EV).

Actual Cost

The amount spent on an item is often more or less than the estimated amount that was budgeted for that item. The actual cost (AC)
is the sum of the amounts actually spent on the items.

 Comparing PV, EV, and AC in John's Move on Day Six

 Dion and Carlita were both trying to lose weight and just wanted a nice salad. Consequently, the lunch cost less than expected.
 John makes a stop at a store that sells moving supplies at discount rates. They do not have all the items he needs, but the prices
 are lower than those quoted by the moving company. They have a very good price on lifting straps so he decides to buy an
 extra pair. He returns with some of the items on his list, but this phase of the job is not complete by the end of day six. John
 bought half of the small boxes, all of five other items, twice as many lifting straps, and none of four other items. John is only
 six days into his project, and his costs and performance are starting to vary from the plan. Earned value analysis gives us a
 method for reporting that progress. Refer to the figure below.

 Figure 9.7 Planned Value, Earned Value, and Actual Cost

Cost         Project Earned Value Analysis-Day 6

Cost         Budgeted Cost oCfoWstork Scheduled Budgeted Cost of Work Performed  Actual Cost (AC)
                                                             Cost
             (BCWS)                               (BCWP)

Description  Quantity   Cost                      Quantity   Cost                Quantity          Cost

Lunch        3          $45.00                    3          $45.00              3                 $35.00

Small Boxes  10         $7.00                     5          $8.50               5                 $9.50

Medium Boxes 15         $35.25                    15         $35.25              15                $28.00

Large Boxes  7          $21.00

Extra Large Boxes 7     $26.25

Short Hanger Boxes 3    $23.85

Box Tape     2          $7.70                     2          $7.70               2                 $5.50

Markers      2          $3.00                     2          $3.00               2                 $2.00

Mattress/Spring Bags 2  $5.90                     2          $5.90               2                 $7.50

Lift Straps per Pair 1  $24.95                    1          $24.95              2                 $38.50

Bubble Wrap 1           $19.95

Furniture Pads 4        $31.80                    4          $31.80              4                 $28.50

Quantity     CosPtV     Qua$n26ti1ty.65  CosEtV              Qua$n16ti2ty.10     CosAt C           $154.50

                                                      9.2.3                               https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24706
The original schedule called for spending $261.65 (PV) by day six. The amount of work done was worth $162.10 (EV) according
to the estimates, but the actual cost was only $154.50 (AC).

Schedule Variance

The project manager must know if the project is on schedule and within the budget. The difference between planned and actual
progress is the variance. The schedule variance (SV) is the difference between the earned value (EV) and the planned value (PV).
Expressed as a formula, SV = EV - PV. If less value has been earned than was planned, the schedule variance is negative, which
means the project is behind schedule.

  Schedule Variance on John's Move

  Planning for John's move calls for spending $261.65 by day six, which is the planned value (PV). The difference between the
  planned value and the earned value is the scheduled variance (SV). The formula is SV = EV - PV. In this example, SV =
  $162.10 - $261.65 = $(99.55) A negative SV indicates the project is behind schedule.

The difference between the earned value (EV) and the actual cost (AC) is the cost variance (CV). Expressed as a formula, CV = EV
- AC

  Cost Variance on John's Move

  The difference between the earned value of $162.10 and the actual cost of $154.50 is the cost variance (CV). The formula is
  CV = EV - AC. In this example, CV = $162.10 - $154.50 = $7.60.

A positive CV indicates the project is under budget.

Variance Indexes for Schedule and Cost

The schedule variance and the cost variance provide the amount by which the spending is behind (or ahead of) schedule and the
amount by which a project is exceeding (or less than) its budget. They do not give an idea of how these amounts compare with the
total budget.
The ratio of earned value to planned value gives an indication of how much of the project is completed. This ratio is the schedule
performance index (SPI). The formula is SPI = EV/PV. In the John's move example, the SPI equals 0.62 (SPI = $162.10/$261.65 =
0.62) A SPI value less than one indicates the project is behind schedule.
The ratio of the earned value to the actual cost is the cost performance index (CPI). The formula is CPI = EV/AC.

  Cost Performance Index of John's Move

  In the John's move example, CPI = $162.10/$154.50 = 1.05 A value greater than 1 indicates the project is under budget.

9.2.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24706
                               Figure 9.8 Schedule Variance and Cost Variance on Day Six of the John's Move Project

During the project, the manager can evaluate the schedule using the schedule variance (SV) and the schedule performance index
(SPI) and the budget using the cost variance (CV) and the cost performance index (CPI).

Estimated Cost to Complete the Project

Partway through the project, the manager evaluates the accuracy of the cost estimates for the activities that have taken place and
uses that experience to predict how much money it will take to complete the unfinished activities of the project--the estimate to
complete (ETC).

Atypical Cost Variance

To calculate the ETC, the manager must decide if the cost variance observed in the estimates to that point are representative of
the future. For example, if unusually bad weather causes increased cost during the first part of the project, it is not likely to have
the same effect on the rest of the project. If the manager decides that the cost variance up to this point in the project is atypical
--not typical--then the estimate to complete is the difference between the original budget for the entire project--the budget at
completion (BAC)--and the earned value (EV) up to that point. Expressed as a formula, ETC = BAC - EV

  Estimate to Complete John's Move

  In John's move, John was able to buy most of the items at a discount house that did not have a complete inventory and, he
  chose to buy an extra pair of lift straps. He knows that the planned values for packing materials were obtained from the
  price list at the moving company where he will have to buy the rest of the items, so those two factors are not likely to be
  typical of the remaining purchases. The reduced cost of lunch is unrelated to the future costs of packing materials, truck
  rentals, and hotel fees. John decides that the factors that caused the variances are atypical. He calculates that the estimate to
  complete (ETC) is the budget at completion ($1,534) minus the earned value at that point ($162.10), which equals
  $1,371.90. Expressed as a formula, ETC = $1,534 - $162.10 = $1,371.90.

Typical Cost Variance

If the manager decides that the cost variance is caused by factors that will affect the remaining activities, such as higher labor
and material costs, then the estimate to complete (ETC) needs to be adjusted by dividing it by the cost performance index (CPI).
For example, if labor costs on the first part of a project are estimated at $80,000 (EV) and they actually cost $85,000 (AC), the
cost variance will be 0.94. (Recall that the cost variance = EV - AC).

To calculate the estimate to complete (ETC) assuming the cost variance on known activities is typical of future cost, the formula
is ETC = (BAC - EV)/CPI. If the budget at completion (BAC) of the project is $800,000, the estimate to complete is ($800,000
- $80,000)/0.94 = $766,000.

9.2.5  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24706
Estimate Final Project Cost

If the costs of the activities up to the present vary from the original estimates, it will affect the total estimate for the project cost.
The new estimate of the project cost is the estimate at completion (EAC). To calculate the EAC, the estimate to complete (ETC)
is added to the actual cost (AC) of the activities already performed. Expressed as a formula, EAC = AC + ETC.

 Estimate at Completion for John's Move

 The revised estimate at completion (EAC) for John's move at this point in the process is EAC = $154.50 + $1,371.90 =
 $1,526.40.

Refer to Figure 9.9 "Summary of Terms and Formulas for Earned Value Analysis" for a summary of terms and formulas.
Figure 9.9 Summary of Terms and Formulas for Earned Value Analysis

Term               Acronym      Description               Formula             John's Move
Actual Cost        AC                                                         $154.50
                                The money actually
                                spent on projects up to
                                the present

Budget at Completion BAC        Original budget for the                       $1,534.00
                                project (same as                              1.05
Cost Performance Index CPI      BCWS)                     CPI = EV / AC       $7.60
                                                          CV = EV - AC
Cost Variance      CV           Ratio of earned value to
                                actual cost

                                Difference between
                                earned value and actual
                                cost

Earned Value       EV           Sum of estimates for                          $162.10
                                work actually done up                         $1,526.40
Estimate at Completion EAC      to the present            EAC = AC + ETC      $1,371.90
                                                          ETC = BAC - EV
Estimate to Complete ETC        Revised estimate of
                                total project cost

                                Money to complete the
                                project if early cost
                                variance is atypical

Estimate to Complete ETC        Money to complete the     ETC - (BAC - EV) /  N/A
                                project if early cost     CPI                 $261.65
Planned Value      PV           variance is typical                           .62
                                                          SPI = EV / PV
Schedule Performance Index SPI  Sum of the estimates for
                                work done up to the
                                present

                                Ratio of earned value to
                                planned value

Schedule Variance  SV           Difference between        SV = EV - PV        $(99.55)
                                earned value and
                                planned value

                                9.2.6                                     https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24706
    Key Takeaways
        Extra money is allocated in a contingency fund to deal with activities where costs exceed estimates. Funds are allocated in a
        management reserves in case a significant opportunity or challenge occurs that requires change of scope but funds are
        needed immediately before a scope change can typically be negotiated.
        Schedule variance is the difference between the part of the budget that has been done so far (EV) versus the part that was
        planned to be completed by now (PV). Similarly, the cost variance is the difference between the EV and the actual cost
        (AC).
        The schedule performance index (SPI) is the ratio of the earned value and the planned value. The cost performance index
        (CPI) is the ratio of the earned value (EV) to the actual cost (AC).
        The formula used to calculate the amount of money needed to complete the project (ETC) depends on whether or not the
        cost variance to this point is expected to continue (typical) or not (atypical). If the cost variance is atypical, the ETC is
        simply the original total budget (BAC) minus the earned value (EV). If they are typical of future cost variances, the ETC is
        adjusted by dividing the difference between BAC and EV by the CPI.
        The final budget is the actual cost (AC) to this point plus the estimate to complete (ETC).

   Exercises

     1. Money that is allocated for dealing with unplanned but predictable expenses is _________ reserve.
     2. The formula used to calculate the cost performance index is ____________.
     3. The formula used to calculate the estimate to complete for atypical cost variances is _________________________.
     4. The sum of the budgeted amounts for the tasks that have been performed is the _______ _______ (two words).
     5. Schedule variance is the ____ minus the _____ and cost variance is the ____ minus the _____ (use acronyms).
     6. Schedule performance index is ____ / _____ and the cost performance index is _____ / ______ (use acronyms).
     7. The revised final budget is the ____ plus the _____ (use acronyms).

    Estimating Earned Value
    Consider a project you are familiar with in which the contractor or service provider who was performing the work needed to be
    replaced before the job was completed. Describe how the value of the contractor's efforts up to that point was determined and
    how that evaluation compared to an earned value analysis.

   References

    Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK Guide), 4th ed.
    (Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute, Inc., 2008), 173.

This page titled 9.2: Managing the Budget is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

9.2.7  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24706
9.3: Exercises

Exercises at the end of the chapter are designed to strengthen your understanding and retention of the information recently acquired
in the chapter.

Short Answer Questions

The questions in this section refer to the project budget shown below.

                                                           Figure 9.10 Example for Short Answer Questions
    This project has three completed activities whose durations are indicated by the blue bars in row 2. The budgeted cost of work
    scheduled for each task is shown on the bar in row 2. The budgeted cost of work scheduled for each week is shown on row 3.
    Notice that the amounts in row 3 add up to the amounts shown on the bars. Rows 4 and 5 indicate the budgeted cost of work
    performed and actual cost. Notice that the second task started a week late.

 1. What is the planned value (PV) at the end of week three?
 2. What is the earned value (EV) at the end of week three?
 3. What is the actual cost (AC) at the end of week three?
 4. What is the cost variance (CV) at the end of week three?
 5. What is the schedule variance (SV) at the end of week three?
 6. What is the planned value (PV) at the end of week seven?
 7. What is the earned value (EV) at the end of week seven?
 8. What is the actual cost (AC) at the end of week seven?
 9. What is the cost variance (CV) at the end of week seven?
10. What is the schedule variance (SV) at the end of week seven?
11. What is the cost performance index (CPI) at the end of week seven?
12. What is the schedule performance Index at the end of week seven?
13. If the budget at completion (BAC) for this project is $500,000, what is the Estimate to Complete (ETC) at the end of week

    seven if the cost and schedule variances experienced are typical of the remainder of the activities?
14. Based on your answer to the previous question, what is the estimate at completion (EAC) for this project?

Essay Questions

Write several paragraphs to provide more in-depth analysis and consideration when answering the following questions.

 1. A project is about a third of the way through its scheduled activities, and an earned value management report has been prepared.
    The summary indicates that it has a CPI of 0.9 and an SPI of 0.8. What do these two values tell you about the project?

 2. A project is about half done with a CV of $(4,000) due to atypical costs in the first half of the project. Its project manager
    provides an ETC of $50,000. Interpret this statement in your own words.

 3. Give an example of an analogous estimate and a parametric estimate that are different from those described in the text.

9.3.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24707
Discussion

The exercises in this section are designed to promote exchange of information among students in the classroom or in an online
discussion. The exercises are more open ended, which means that what you find might be completely different from what your
classmates find, and you can all benefit by sharing what you have learned.

 1. Describe an experience of your own that involved a parametric estimate. Describe the parameter and how it was used. Compare
    the estimate with the actual cost.

 2. As an inexperienced project manager, how do you develop expert knowledge? Interview someone who would qualify as an
    expert in estimating costs and ask them to describe the process they went through. Ask them for advice on how to become an
    acknowledged expert in estimating and then share what you learn with your classmates.

This page titled 9.3: Exercises is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

9.3.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24707
9.4: Software and Technology Exercise

  Learning Objectives

    1. Create a spreadsheet to perform an earned value analysis.

Earned Value Analysis

In this exercise, you apply the formulas of earned value (EV) analysis to the John's Move project. Complete the exercise by
following these instructions:

 1. Navigate to the location where the student supplement files are stored and open Ch09EV.xls in a spreadsheet program such as
    MS Excel. Save the file on your computer as Ch09EVStudentName.xls. Four tasks span four weeks. The budgeted cost of work
    scheduled (BCWS) is shown at the beginning of each bar, as shown in Figure 9.11 "EV Analysis for John's Move".

 2. In cell C25, type =C4+C7+I10+L12 and then press Enter. The sum of the budgeted amounts for each task is the budget at
    completion (BAC).

 3. Click cell C25 to select it. In the Number group, click the Increase Decimal button two times, if necessary, to display two
    decimal places. See Figure 9.12 "BAC Calculation".

 4. Click cell E15. Type =C4+C7/2. The planned value (PV) for the first week is the BCWS for the week. In this example, that is
    all the BCWS for planning and half of the BCWS for packing. The packing task is scheduled to take two weeks. Without further
    instructions, the budgeted amount is divided equally between the two weeks.

 5. Move the mouse pointer to the Enter button on the Formula bar. See Figure 9.13 "PV Calculation for Week 1". Entering
    formulas by using this button keeps the selection on the current cell.

 6. On the Formula bar, click the Enter button. The PV is calculated and displayed in cell E15.
 7. Capture this screen and paste it into a blank word processing document. Save the word processing document as

    Ch9EVStudentName using the Word 2003 .doc file format.
 8. In the spreadsheet, click cell E16. Type =D5+D8 and then, on the Formula bar, click the Enter button. The EV is the sum of the

    budgeted work that has been performed up to that point in the project. See Figure 9.14 "EV Calculation for Week 1".
 9. Click cell E17. Type =E5+E8 and then, on the Formula bar, click the Enter button. The actual cost (AC) for week 1 is the sum

    of the AC for planning and packing that occurred in week 1.
10. Click cell E18. Type =E16-E17 and then, on the Formula bar, click the Enter button. The cost variance (CV) for week 1 is the

    EV minus the AC.
11. Click cell E19. Type =E16-E15 and then, on the Formula bar, click the Enter button. The schedule variance (SV) for week 1 is

    EV minus the PV. See Figure 9.15 "AC, CV, and SV Calculations for Week 1".
12. Refer to the definitions of CPI and SPI. Enter formulas in cells E20 and E21 to calculate the CPI and SPI. Recall that formulas

    begin with an equal sign and use cell names instead of the numbers in those cells. Use the Decrease Decimal or Increase
    Decimal buttons as needed to display two decimal places. See Figure 9.16 "CPI and SPI Calculations for Week 1".
13. Refer to the definitions of estimate to complete (ETC) for typical and atypical variances in AC. Enter formulas in cells E22 and
    E23 to calculate the ETC for typical and atypical CV. Recall that the BAC value is in cell C25. Compare your results to Figure
    9.17 "ETC at the End of Week 1 for Typical and Atypical AC".
14. Click cell H15. Type =E15+C7/2 and then, on the Formula bar, click the Enter button. The PV at the end of week 2 is the sum
    of PV from the previous week plus the PV for the current week. In this case, the PV for week 2 is the second half of the packing
    task.
15. Click cell H16. Type =E16+G8 and then, on the Formula bar, click the Enter button. The EV at the end of week 2 is the sum of
    EV from the previous week plus the budgeted cost of work performed (BCWP) for the current week.
16. Click cell H17. Type =E17+H8 and then, on the Formula bar, click the Enter button. The AC at the end of week 2 is the sum of
    AC from the previous week plus the AC for the current week.
17. Refer to the definitions for CV, SV, CPI, SPI, and ETC and write formulas in cells H18 through H23 to calculate those values at
    the end of week 2. See Figure 9.18 "Calculations for Week 2".
18. Capture the screen and paste it into Ch09EVStudentName.doc.

9.4.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24708
19. In the spreadsheet, apply what you have learned to perform similar calculations for weeks 3 and 4. See Figure 9.19
    "Calculations for Weeks 3 and 4".

20. Click cell E5. Type 30 and then, on the Formula bar, click the Enter button. Notice that all the calculations that depend on the
    AC in this cell are recalculated. See Figure 9.20 "Values That Depend on the AC in Cell E5 Change".

21. Capture the screen and paste it into Ch09EVStudentName.doc.

Prepare the worksheet for printing:

1. In the spreadsheet, on the menu bar, click Page Layout. In the Page Setup group, at the lower right corner, click the Expand
   button.

2. In the Page Setup dialog box, on the Page tab, click the Landscape button and the Fit To button. See Figure 9.21 "Printout
   Oriented Horizontally and Forced to Fit on One Page".

3. In the Page Setup dialog box, on the Header/Footer tab, click the In the Header dialog box, click the Left section, and then type
   your name. Click the Center section and then type John's Move. Click the Right section box and type For InstructorName,
   substituting your instructor's name. See Figure 9.22 "Your Name and Your Instructor's Name in the Header".

4. Click OK to close both dialog boxes. Close the print preview, if necessary.
5. Review your work in Ch09EVStudentName.xls and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

Element                              Best                            Adequate                Poor

File name                            Ch09EVStudentName.xls           Ch09EVStudentName.xlsx  Did not include student name

Create a spreadsheet to              Formulas that produce the       Same as Best            Could do formulas for weeks 1
perform an EV analysis               values shown in Figure 9.16                             and 2 but could not apply
                                     "CPI and SPI Calculations for                           knowledge to weeks 3 and 4;
                                     Week 1" and Figure 9.17                                 errors in formulas; missing
                                     "ETC at the End of Week 1 for                           header
                                     Typical and Atypical AC",
                                     depending on the value in cell
                                     E5; names in header for
                                     printout

6. Review your work in Ch09EVStudentName.doc and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

Element                              Best                            Adequate                Poor

File name                            Ch09EVStudentName.doc           Same name saved as .docx file Used a different name

Use dedicated project                Three screen captures that      Same as Best            Missing screens
management software to               show the development of the
manage changes to the WBS            spreadsheet

 7. Save the file and submit it as directed by the instructor.

This page titled 9.4: Software and Technology Exercise is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                                            9.4.2                            https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24708
CHAPTER OVERVIEW

10: Managing Project Quality

  10.1: Quality and Statistics
  10.2: Development of Quality as a Competitive Advantage
  10.3: Relevance of Quality Programs to Project Quality
  10.4: Planning and Controlling Project Quality
  10.5: Assuring Quality
  10.6: Exercises
  10.7: Software and Technology Exercises
This page titled 10: Managing Project Quality is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                                                                              1
10.1: Quality and Statistics

  Learning Objectives

    1. Define quality.
    2. Define and explain statistics terms used in quality control.
    3. Estimate the likelihood of samples falling within one, two, or three standard deviations of the mean given a normal

       distribution caused by random factors.

Definitions of Quality and Grade

Quality is a relative term, which means that something is of high or low quality compared to what it is required to be. According to
the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), quality is "the degree to which a set of inherent characteristics fulfill
requirements" (International Organization for Standardization, 2005; Project Management Institute, 2008). The requirements of a
product or process can be categorized or given a grade. The quality is determined by how well something meets the requirements of
its grade. Consider the following examples.

  Quality of Gasoline Grades

  Petroleum refiners provide gasoline in several different grades based on the octane rating because higher octane ratings are
  suitable for higher compression engines. Gasoline must not be contaminated with dirt or water, and the actual performance of
  the fuel must be close to its octane rating. A shipment of low-grade gasoline graded as 87 octane that is free of water or other
  contaminants would be of high quality, while a shipment of high grade 93 octane gas that is contaminated with dirt would be of
  low quality.

  Quality of Furniture Packing in John's Move

  John has antique furniture that is in excellent condition that was left to him by his grandmother. The pieces are important to
  John for sentimental reasons and they are also valuable. John decides to hire movers (high-grade professionals) to load his
  furniture into the truck using appropriate padding and restraints to prevent dents and scratches during the long trip to Atlanta
  and then to unload the truck in Atlanta. John's standard for high quality is that no observable damage occurs to his large pieces
  of furniture, especially the antiques. If the furniture arrives in his new apartment without a single dent, scratch, or other
  damage, the activity will be of high quality.

    For most people, the term quality also implies good value--getting your money's worth. For example, even low-grade products
    should still work as expected, be safe to use, and last a reasonable amount of time.

   Statistics Terminology

    Determining how well products meet grade requirements is done by taking measurements and then interpreting those
    measurements. Statistics--the mathematical interpretation of numerical data--is useful when interpreting large numbers of
    measurements and is used to determine how well the product meets a specification when the same product is made repeatedly.
    Measurements made on samples of the product must be between control limits--the upper and lower extremes of allowable
    variation--and it is up to management to design a process that will consistently produce products between those limits.

      Setting Control Limits in Gasoline Production

       A petroleum refinery produces large quantities of fuel in several grades. Samples of the fuels are extracted and measured at
       regular intervals. If a fuel is supposed to have an 87 octane performance, samples of the fuel should produce test results that
       are close to that value. Many of the samples will have scores that are different from 87. The differences are due to random
       factors that are difficult or expensive to control. Most of the samples should be close to the 87 rating and none of them
       should be too far off. The manufacturer has grades of 85 and 89, so they decide that none of the samples of the 87 octane
       fuel should be less than 86 or higher than 88.

10.1.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24709
If a process is designed to produce a product of a certain size or other measured characteristic, it is impossible to control all the
small factors that can cause the product to differ slightly from the desired measurement. Some of these factors will produce
products that have measurements that are larger than desired and some will have the opposite effect. If several random factors
are affecting the process, they tend to offset each other most of the time, and the most common results are near the middle of the
range. This idea is called the central limit theorem.

If the range of possible measurement values is divided equally into subdivisions called bins, the measurements can be sorted,
and the number of measurements that fall into each bin can be counted. The result is a frequency distribution that shows how
many measurements fall into each bin. If the effects that are causing the differences are random and tend to offset each other,
the frequency distribution is called a normal distribution, which resembles the shape of a bell with edges that flare out. The
edges of a theoretical normal distribution curve get very close to zero but do not reach zero.

  Normal Distribution of Gasoline Samples

  A refinery's quality control manager measures many samples of 87 octane gasoline, sorts the measurements by their octane
  rating into bins that are 0.1 octane wide, and then counts the number of measurements in each bin. Then she creates a
  frequency distribution chart of the data, as shown in Figure 10.1 "Normal Distribution of Measurements of Gasoline
  Samples".

If the measurements of product samples are distributed equally above and below the center of the distribution as they are in
Figure 10.1 "Normal Distribution of Measurements of Gasoline Samples", the average of those measurements is also the center
value that is called the mean and is represented in formulas by the lowercase Greek letter  (pronounced mu). The amount of
difference of the measurements from the central value is called the sample standard deviation or just the standard deviation. The
first step in calculating the standard deviation is subtracting each measurement from the central value and then squaring that
difference. (Recall from your mathematics courses that squaring a number is multiplying it by itself and that the result is always
positive.) The next step is to sum these squared values and divide by the number of values minus one. The last step is to take the
square root. The result can be thought of as an average difference. (If you had used the usual method of taking an average, the
positive and negative numbers would have summed to zero.) Mathematicians represent the standard deviation with the
lowercase Greek letter  (pronounced sigma). If all the elements of a group are measured, it is called the standard deviation of
the population and the second step does not use a minus one.

                                          Figure 10.1 Normal Distribution of Measurements of Gasoline Samples
The chart shows that the most common measurements of octane rating are close to 87 and that the other measurements are
distributed equally above and below 87. The shape of the distribution chart supports the central limit theorem's assumption that
the factors that are affecting the octane rating are random and tend to offset each other, which is indicated by the symmetric
shape. This distribution is a classic example of a normal distribution. The quality control manager notices that none of the
measurements are above 88 or below 86 so they are within control limits and concludes that the process is working
satisfactorily.

10.1.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24709
 Standard Deviation of Gasoline Samples

 The refinery's quality control manager uses the standard deviation function in his spreadsheet program to find the standard
 deviation of the sample measurements and finds that for his data, the standard deviation is 0.3 octane. She marks the range
 on the frequency distribution chart to show the values that fall within one sigma (standard deviation) on either side of the
 mean. See the figure below.

                                                                               Figure 10.2
       Most of the measurements are within 0.3 octane of 87.

For normal distributions, about 68.3 percent of the measurements fall within one standard deviation on either side of the mean.
This is a useful rule of thumb for analyzing some types of data. If the variation between measurements is caused by random
factors that result in a normal distribution and someone tells you the mean and the standard deviation, you know that a little
over two-thirds of the measurements are within a standard deviation on either side of the mean. Because of the shape of the
curve, the number of measurements within two standard deviations is 95.4 percent, and the number of measurements within
three standard deviations is 99.7 percent. For example, if someone said the average (mean) height for adult men in the United
States is 5 feet 10 inches (70 inches) and the standard deviation is about 3 inches, you would know that 68 percent of the men in
the United States are between five feet seven inches (67 inches) and six feet one inch (73 inches) in height. You would also
know that about 95 percent of the adult men in the United States were between five feet four inches and six feet four inches tall,
and that almost all of them (99.7 percent) are between five feet one inches and six feet seven inches tall. These figures are
referred to as the 68-95-99.7 rule.

  Almost All Samples of Gasoline are Within Three STD

  The refinery's quality control manager marks the ranges included within two and three standard deviations, as shown
  below.

10.1.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24709
                                   Figure 10.3 The 68-95-99.7 Rule

Some products must have less variability than others to meet their purpose. For example, if one machine drills a hole and
another machine shapes a rod that will slide through the hole, it might be very important to be sure that if the smallest hole was
ever matched with the widest rod, that the rod would still fit. Three standard deviations from the control limits might be fine for
some products but not for others. In general, if the mean is six standard deviations from both control limits, the likelihood of a
part exceeding the control limits from random variation is practically zero (2 in 1,000,000,000). Refer to Figure 10.4 "Meaning
of Sigma Levels".

Figure 10.4 Meaning of Sigma Levels

Standard Deviations   Sigma Level  Percentage Inside  Percentage Outside  Parts Outside Control
between Mean and      1            Control Limits     Control Limits      Limits (approximate)
Either Control Limit
                                   68.3%              31.7%               32 per 100
1

2                     2            95.4%              4.6%                5 per 100

3                     3            99.7%              .3%                 3 per 1,000

4                     4            99.9937%           .0063%              4 per 100,000

5                     5            99.99994%          .00006%             6 per 10 million

6                     6            99.9999998%        .0000002%           2 per billion

 A Step Project Improves Quality of Gasoline

 A new refinery process is installed that produces fuels with less variability. The refinery's quality control manager takes a
 new set of samples and charts a new frequency distribution diagram, as shown below.

                                          10.1.4                          https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24709
                                                              Figure 10.5 Smaller Standard Deviation

    The refinery's quality control manager calculates that the new standard deviation is 0.2 octane. From this, he can use the 68-
    95-99.7 rule to estimate that 68.3 percent of the fuel produced will be between 86.8 and 87.2 and that 99.7 percent will be
    between 86.4 and 87.6 octane. A shorthand way of describing this amount of control is to say that it is a five-sigma
    production system, which refers to the five standard deviations between the mean and the control limit on each side.

Key Takeaways
    Quality is the degree to which a product or service fulfills requirements and provides value for its price.
    Statistics is the mathematical interpretation of numerical data, and several statistical terms are used in quality control.
    Control limits are the boundaries of acceptable variation.
    If random factors cause variation, they will tend to cancel each other out--the central limit theorem. The central point in the
    distribution is the mean, which is represented by the Greek letter mu, . If you choose intervals called bins and count the
    number of samples that fall into each interval, the result is a frequency distribution. If you chart the distribution and the
    factors that cause variation are random, the frequency distribution is a normal distribution, which looks bell shaped.
    The center of the normal distribution is called the mean, and the average variation is calculated in a special way that finds
    the average of the squares of the differences between samples and the mean and then takes the square root. This average
    difference is called the standard deviation, which is represented by the Greek letter sigma, .
    About 68 percent of the samples are within one standard deviation, 95.4 percent are within two, and 99.7 percent are within
    three.

Exercises

 1. According to the ISO, quality is the degree to which a set of inherent characteristics fulfill ___________.
 2. The upper and lower extremes of acceptable variation from the mean are called the __________ limits.
 3. The odds that a sample's measurement will be within one standard deviation of the mean is ____ percent.
 4. How is quality related to grade?
 5. If the measurements in a frequency distribution chart are grouped near the mean in normal distribution, what does that imply

    about the causes of the variation?
 6. If you have a set of sample data and you had to calculate the standard deviation, what are the steps?
 7. If a set of sample measurements has a mean of 100, a normal distribution, a standard deviation of 2, and control limits of 94

    and 106, what percentage of the samples are expected to be between 94 and 106? Explain your answer.

Using Statistical Measures

    Choose two groups of people or items that have a measurable characteristic that can be compared, such as the height of adult
    males and females. Describe the distribution of the measurements by stating whether you think the groups have a relatively
    small or large standard deviation and whether the distributions overlap (e.g., some women are taller than some men even

10.1.5  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24709
        though the mean height for men is greater than the mean height for women). Demonstrate that you know how to use the
        following terms correctly in context:

            Normal distribution
            Standard deviation
            Mean

   References

    International Organization for Standardization, Quality Management Systems--Fundamentals and Vocabulary (Geneva: ISO
    Press, 2005).

    Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK Guide), 4th ed.
    (Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute, Inc., 2008), 190.

This page titled 10.1: Quality and Statistics is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

10.1.6  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24709
10.2: Development of Quality as a Competitive Advantage

  Learning Objectives

    1. Describe the historical events and forces that led up to today's emphasis on quality as a competitive requirement.
    2. Describe quality awards in Japan and the United States.
    3. Describe quality programs and standards such as TQM, Six Sigma, and ISO 9000.
    4. Describe and calculate the cost of quality.

Quality management is an approach to work that has become increasingly important as global cooperation and competition have
increased. A review of the history of quality management explains why it is so important to companies and why clients often
require projects to document their processes to satisfy quality standards.

Statistical Control Before World War II

Prior to the late 1700s, products such as firearms and clocks were made as individual works where the parts were adjusted to each
other so they could work together. If a part broke, a new one had to be made by hand to fit. In 1790 in France, Honor Blanc
demonstrated that he could make musket parts so nearly identical that a musket could be assembled from bins of parts chosen at
random (Alder, 1997). The practice of making parts to a high level of accuracy in their dimensions and finishes made the parts
interchangeable. The use of interchangeable parts became the founding principle of assembly line manufacturing to produce all
manner of goods from sewing machines to automobiles. The manufacturers of firearms and weapons were often the leaders in
improving quality because reliable and safe operation of weapons and their rapid repair is a matter of life and death.

Statistical Control in the United States During World War II

During World War II, factories were converted from manufacturing consumer goods to weapons. War plants had to make large
numbers of parts as fast as possible while doing it safely for the workers and for the service members who used them. Important
improvements in quality control (QC)--the management of production standards through statistical interpretation of random
product measurements, which emphasizes consistency and accuracy--were made during this period. A key figure in the history of
quality management who was an important person in the war effort was Walter Shewhart at Bell Telephone Laboratories. Shewhart
recognized that real processes seldom behaved like theoretical random distributions and tended to change with time. He separated
causes of variation into two categories: chance cause and assignable cause. Chance causes could be ignored if they did not cause
too much variation, and trying to eliminate them often made the problem worse, but assignable causes could be fixed. To help
distinguish between variations caused by random events and trends that indicated assignable causes, Shewhart introduced the
control chart, which is also known as a type of run chart because data are collected while the process is running. A control chart has
time on the bottom axis and a plot of sample measurements. The mean, upper control limit, lower control limit, and warning lines
that are two sigma from the mean are indicated by horizontal lines.

  Control Chart Shows Production Variation of Gasoline

  The refinery quality control manager takes samples each day of the 87 octane gasoline for twenty days and charts the data on a
  control chart, as shown below.

10.2.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24710
                                             Figure 10.6 Control Chart Displaying Variations Due to Chance Causes

She recognizes that the highest and lowest measurements are not part of a trend and are probably due to chance causes. However,
the control chart from the next twenty days, as shown below, indicates an upward trend that might be due to an assignable cause.
She alerts the process manager to let him know that there is a problem that needs to be fixed before the product exceeds the upper
control limit. This might indicate the need to initiate a project to fix the problem.

                                Figure 10.7 Control Chart Displaying Variations That Might Be Due to an Assignable Cause

Deming and Postwar Japan

The most influential person in modern quality control was an American who was a hero in Japan but virtually unknown in the
United States. W. Edwards Deming worked with Shewhart at Bell Labs and helped apply Shewhart's ideas to American
manufacturing processes during World War II. Following the war, American factories returned to the production of consumer
goods. Many of the other major manufacturing centers in the world had been damaged by bombing during the war and took time to
recover. Without the safety needs of wartime and with little competition, quality control was not a high priority for American
companies (Dowd, 2006). Management in the United States focused on increasing production to meet demand and lowering costs
to increase profits.

After the war, while the United States occupied Japan, Deming was asked by the U.S. Department of the Army to assist with the
statistics of the 1950 census in Japan. Kenichi Koyanagi, the managing director of the Union of Japanese Scientists and Engineers
and a very influential industrialist, asked Deming to speak to twenty-one top industrial leaders on the topic of global strategy for
Japanese industry. Deming went beyond Shewhart's work and talked about his philosophy of quality manufacturing and how the
responsibility for quality begins with management. He explained that a corporate culture devoted to producing high-quality

10.2.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24710
products would result in less waste, lower costs, greater client loyalty, and greater market share. With Koyanagi's support,
Deming's ideas were widely adopted by these influential leaders.

Deming described his philosophy as a system of profound knowledge, which has four parts:

 1. Appreciation of a system. Understanding how suppliers, producers, and clients interact
 2. Knowledge of variation. Understanding statistical variation
 3. Theory of knowledge. Understanding what can be known and what cannot
 4. Knowledge of psychology. Understanding human nature

In 1950, the Japanese created the Deming prize in Deming's honor, which is awarded to an individual and a company for major
advances in quality improvements. In 1960, Deming was awarded the Order of the Sacred Treasure, Second Class by the Prime
Minister on behalf of Emperor Hirohito.

Quality Management in America

By the 1970s, Japanese companies had a reputation for high quality and were taking market share from American companies, but
Deming's teachings were virtually unknown in his own country. It was not until 1980 that America became aware of Deming when
his work was described in an NBC documentary titled If Japan Can, Why Can't We? (Dowd, 2006) By then, Deming was eighty
years old and the producer of the show originally assumed he was dead (Boardman, 1994).

In 1982, Deming's book was published and later retitled Out of Crisis, in 1986 (Deming, 1982). It was aimed at explaining his
system to American manufacturers and the American public. In the book, Deming described fourteen principles of management to
guide the implementation of his philosophy. Some of them were challenges to Western managers and very different from the
thinking that was prevalent at the time. In brief, they are as follows:

 1. Create constancy of purpose toward improvement of product and service.
 2. Adopt a new philosophy. We are in a new economic age. Western management must awaken to the challenge, learn their

    responsibilities, and take on leadership for a change.
 3. Cease dependence on inspection to achieve quality. Eliminate the need for inspection on a mass basis by building quality into

    the product in the first place.
 4. End the practice of awarding business on the basis of price tag. Instead, minimize cost. Move toward a single supplier for any

    one item, on a long-term relationship of loyalty and trust.
 5. Improve constantly and forever the system of production and service to improve quality and productivity and thus constantly

    decrease costs.
 6. Institute training on the job.
 7. Institute leadership. The aim of supervision should be to help people and machines and gadgets to do a better job. Supervision

    of management is in need of overhaul, as well as supervision of production workers.
 8. Drive out fear, so that everyone may work effectively for the company.
 9. Break down barriers between departments.
10. Eliminate slogans, exhortations, and targets for the workforce asking for zero defects and new levels of productivity.
11. Eliminate work standards (quotas) on the factory floor. Substitute leadership.
12. Remove barriers that rob the hourly worker of his right to pride of workmanship.
13. Institute a vigorous program of education and self-improvement.
14. Put everybody in the company to work to accomplish the transformation. The transformation is everybody's job.

Between 1979 and 1982, Ford Motor Company lost $3 billion, and they were looking for solutions to their problems. They chose to
apply Deming's approach to develop the new Taurus-Sable model and by 1986 had become the most profitable American auto
company (Gabor, 2001).

Ford adopted a Japanese approach to quality known in America as total quality management (TQM). TQM in Japan has four major
components:

 1. Kaizen. Improvement must involve all members of a company (Encyclopedia Britannica, 2009).
 2. Atarimae hinshitsu. Make things work the way they are supposed to work (NationMaster.com, 2009).
 3. Kansei. Learn from the way a user applies the product to make improvements (WASEDA University, 2010).

10.2.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24710
 4. Miryokuteki hinshitsu. Things should have an aesthetic quality and be pleasing to use (NationMaster.com, 2009).

According to Peter B. Petersen (Petersen, 1999), TQM differs from the Deming approach in four fundamental ways:

 1. The Deming approach represents one philosophy that is used in its entirety or not at all. In contrast, TQM can be tailored to a
    particular environment.

 2. Both agree that a long-term commitment is required by top management. However, Deming would drop clients if they started to
    wane, while TQM consultants were less demanding.

 3. Deming insists on constancy of purpose, while TQM adapts to the situation, which results in lack of constancy.
 4. Deming requires adoption of his principles of profound knowledge, while TQM lacks this unified philosophy.

Many poorly qualified consulting firms provided training in TQM to American companies. The approach worked in some cases but
not in others where it was applied superficially, and the movement's credibility was diminished.

Another approach to quality management in the United States was formulated at Motorola in 1986 and was named Six Sigma (6).
The Six Sigma practices were based on Deming's work, TQM, and others and had similarities regarding continuous efforts at
improvement involving everyone at the company. It emphasized a clear focus on achieving quantifiable financial returns from any
Six Sigma project. To determine the financial return on a quality initiative, the cost of quality (COQ) must be determined. The cost
of quality has two parts: the cost of prevention and the cost of failure (or nonconformance). The cost of quality is the sum of the
cost of prevention and the cost of failure. If spending more on prevention reduces the cost of failure by an even greater amount, the
total cost of quality is reduced.

    Cost of prevention

     1. Cost of conformance. Cost to improve quality
     2. Cost of appraisal. Cost to measure and evaluate quality

    Cost of failure

     1. Internal costs. Repairing bad parts before shipment or retooling a manufacturing line to reduce failures
     2. External costs. Managing returns, lawsuits, product recalls

Six Sigma identified individuals as experts in quality and awarded titles like Champion and Master Black Belt. The name Six
Sigma refers to a process that has six standard deviations from the mean to either control limit that would ensure virtually zero
defects. (In practice, the Six Sigma approach allows for a 1.5 sigma drift, so it is really a 4.5 sigma standard that allows
approximately 3.4 defects per million products.) This approach was adopted by Jack Welch at General Electric with great success.
By the late 1990s, about two-thirds of the top five hundred companies in the United States had begun Six Sigma projects, including
Ford, which had allowed its quality programs to slip. To provide encouragement and a consistent standard, the U.S. government
created the Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award in 1987 to encourage companies to improve quality; the award was named
for Malcolm Baldrige who was the U.S. secretary of commerce from 1981 to 1987 (National Institute of Standards and Technology,
2008). The criteria used to determine award winners are as follows:

 1. Leadership of senior executives
 2. Strategic planning
 3. Customer and market focus
 4. Measurement, analysis, and knowledge management
 5. Workforce focus
 6. Process management
 7. Results

Trade and International Standards

Trade between countries increased as countries recovered from WWII and began producing consumer goods. In 1948, the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) established the rules for international trade in the postwar world. Through years of
negotiations based on GATT, the World Trade Organization (WTO) was created in 1995. The WTO is a negotiating forum where
governments can discuss ways to help trade flow as freely as possible (World Trade Organization, 2009).

10.2.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24710
Increases in trade forced companies to improve the quality of their products to compete for clients and to exchange parts reliably
between companies that used parts suppliers. To assist in developing standards for quality that would be the same between
countries, an organization of 158 national standards groups formed the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), which
is headquartered in Switzerland. For example, a company might require a parts supplier to meet certain ISO standards if it wants to
bid on contracts. There are thousands of ISO standards, and they are grouped by their numbers. The ISO 9000 group of standards
relate to quality:

    ISO 9000. Fundamentals and vocabulary for this group of quality standards.
    ISO 9001. Standards for evaluating the quality management processes in an organization. It has five parts:

     1. Overall requirements for the quality management system and documentation
     2. Management responsibility, focus, policy, planning and objectives
     3. Resource management and allocation
     4. Product realization and process management
     5. Measurement, monitoring, analysis, and improvement

    ISO 9004. Ways to extend benefits of ISO 9001 to employees, owners, suppliers, partners, and society in general. It is a guide
    for top management for overall quality improvement.
    ISO 9011. Guidance for auditing a quality system.

Recommended steps for implementing a quality management system (QMS) are as follows:

 1. Fully engage top management.
 2. Identify key processes and the interactions needed to meet quality objectives.
 3. Implement and manage the QMS and its processes.
 4. Build your ISO 9001-based QMS.
 5. Implement the system, train company staff, and verify effective operation of your processes.
 6. Manage your QMS--focus on client satisfaction, strive for continual improvement.
 7. If necessary, seek third-party certification and registration of the QMS, or alternatively, issue a self-declaration of conformity

    (International Organization for Standardization, 2005).

Key Takeaways
    The need for production of safe, reliable weapons that could be mass produced led to use of methods to assure that parts were
    manufactured within controlled limits. An early example is the interchangeable musket parts produced in France in 1790 and,
    later, the quality control methods introduced by Shewhart in the United States during World War II.
    Following World War II, Japanese companies followed advice from Deming and others to make quality a top priority for
    management. Higher-quality products gave Japan a competitive advantage with U.S. consumers that forced U.S. firms to
    respond with similar quality programs.
    The Deming award is given by Japan to companies doing business in Japan for high-quality standards. Similarly, the Baldrige
    National Quality Award is given to U.S. companies and individuals for their contribution to quality.
    Total quality management is a flexible program that is adapted from Japanese practices that emphasize kaizen, participation by
    all; atarimaie hinshitsu, making things work the way they should; kansei, learning from the way the client uses the product to
    make improvements; and miryokuteki hinshitsu, giving products an aesthetic quality to make them pleasing to use. Six Sigma
    identifies specialists within the organization and assigns titles like Master Black Belt. Each quality project must evaluate the
    cost of quality to gain approval.
    The International Standards Institute devises guidelines for establishing practices. The ISO 9000 group are guidelines for
    establishing practices that are likely to create quality products.
    The cost of quality has two parts: the cost of prevention and the cost of failure. The cost of prevention includes costs to establish
    quality practices and the costs to verify them. The cost of failure includes internal costs before the product is sold, such as waste
    and fixing products, while external costs include those that occur after the product is sold, such as returns and lawsuits.

Exercises

 1. Quality control is very important in the manufacturing of _______ because the safe and reliable operation of those products is a
    matter of life and death.

10.2.5  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24710
 2. The prize for quality in Japan is named after _________ (last name).
 3. The quality program created at Motorola and adopted by Jack Welch at General Electric is __________.
 4. The cost of quality considers the cost of prevention and the cost of ___________.
 5. What is the purpose of having an international quality standard like ISO?
 6. Describe benchmarking.
 7. If a quality program costs $10,000 to plan and $50,000 to administer, what is the COQ if the program reduces waste by $30,000

    and returns of bad products by $40,000? Explain how you calculated the answer.

Balancing Cost of Prevention to Cost of Failure

Describe a project activity where the cost of prevention might be much higher than the cost of failure and unlikely enough to accept
the risk of its failure rather than pay the cost of prevention. Similarly, describe a project activity where the cost of prevention is
smaller than the cost of failure.

References

Alder, K., "Innovation and Amnesia: Engineering Rationality and the Fate of Interchangeable Parts Manufacturing in France,"
Technology and Culture 38, no 2 (April 1997): 273-311.

Boardman, T. J., "The Statistician Who Changed the World: W. Edwards Deming, 1900-1993," The American Statistician 48
(August 1994): 179-87.

Deming, W. E., Out of the Crisis (Boston: MIT Press, 1982).

Dowd, J., "How the Japanese Learned to Compete," Asia Times, October 27, 2006, www.atimes.com/atimes/Japan/HJ27Dh01.html
(accessed August 11, 2009).

Encyclopedia Britannica, s.v. "Total Quality Control," http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/1387304/Total-Quality-Control
(accessed August 13, 2009).

Gabor, A. (2001, June 13). Quality revival, Part 2: Ford embraces Six Sigma. New York Times (Late Edition (east Coast)), p. C.5.
Retrieved October 24, 2010, from ProQuest National Newspapers Core.
(Document ID: 74042886).

International Organization for Standardization, Quality Management Systems--Fundamentals and Vocabulary (Geneva: ISO Press,
2005), in Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK Guide), 4th ed.
(Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute, Inc., 2008).

National Institute of Standards and Technology, "Frequently Asked Questions about the Malcolm Baldrige National Quality
Award," November 25, 2008, http://www.nist.gov/baldrige/index.cfm (accessed August 14, 2009).

NationMaster.com, "Miryokuteki Hinshitsu," 2005, www.statemaster.com/encyclopedia/Miryokuteki-Hinshitsu (accessed August
14, 2009).

Petersen, P. B., "Total Quality Management and the Deming Approach to Quality Management," Journal of Management History
5, no. 8 (1999): 468-88.

WASEDA University, "Kansei Quality" (accessed June 20, 2010).

World Trade Organization, "Understanding the WTO: Basics," http://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/whatis_e/tif_e/fact1_e.htm
(accessed August 14, 2009).

This page titled 10.2: Development of Quality as a Competitive Advantage is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed,
and/or curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

10.2.6  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24710
10.3: Relevance of Quality Programs to Project Quality

  Learning Objectives

    1. Identify the similarities between process quality management and project quality management.
    2. Identify the differences between process quality management and project quality management.

Project quality refers to two distinct aspects of the project. Project quality can refer to the quality of the product or service delivered
by the project. Does the end product meet client specifications? For example, does a software development project develop a
program that performs to the client's requirements? A software program that performs the basic work functions but does not
integrate with existing software would not be considered a quality product, as long as the client specified that the software must
interface with existing software.

Project quality can also refer to managing the project efficiently and effectively. Almost any client specification can be met if the
project manager has unlimited time and resources. Recall that high quality means meeting the requirements for a particular grade
while providing value. Meeting project deliverables within the time and resource constraints is also a measure of project quality.
Developing a project execution plan that matches the complexity level of the project is the most critical aspect in developing a
project plan that meets project specifications within the time frame and at the lowest costs. These two aspects of project quality
have similarities and differences to quality as applied to parent organizations.

Similarities

All successful quality programs have (1) a requirement for commitment to quality by all the employees and their partners and (2)
an emphasis on error prevention and client satisfaction. To comply with TQM, Six Sigma, ISO, or other quality standards required
by the client or by the project management firm, the project manager must engage in quality programs and provide documents that
specifically comply with the quality standards in use. For example, a project is typically required to follow the parent
organization's work processes related to procurement and document management. Any project processes that interface with the
organization's quality processes will be required to meet the quality standards of the organization.

If a large project involves repetitive processes such as welding or pouring concrete, statistical processes control methods can be
used to maintain the quality of the product. These processes control methods are similar to those used by process managers in the
manufacturing environment. The intent is for the work of the project to meet design specifications. The welding tools and
equipment must be sufficient to perform the welds established in the welding specifications, and the welds must be tested, usually
by an independent tester, to assure the end product meets the design specifications. The civil engineers design a concrete pour to
meet certain criteria that will support a structure. The criteria, detailed in the design specifications, provide the parameters that the
construction crew must meet when pouring the concrete. On large projects, which sometimes have thousands of welds and
hundreds of yards of concrete to pour, the use of quality control tools and methods are critical to meeting design specifications

Differences

Because projects are temporary, spotting trends in samples produced by repetitive processes is not as important as considering
quality in the planning of the project. Instead, the project manager must be able to provide documentation that demonstrates that the
correct processes are in place to prevent quality failures.

The cost of quality (COQ) must be considered in the scope document and the project budget. If the group or company that is
providing the project management is separate from the client, the project budget will bear the cost of prevention while the client
will reap the rewards of avoiding the costs of failure. If senior management does not recognize the benefit to the organization of
reducing cost of failure by spending more on prevention during the project, the project manager can be placed in the position of
producing a product or service that he or she knows could be of higher quality.

If the cost of quality is not specifically considered and approved by senior management in the scope of the project, quality might be
sacrificed during the project to meet budget goals.

10.3.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24711
  Cost of Quality in an Energy Management System

  At a midwestern university, a new building was being built, but it was over budget. To reduce the cost of the energy
  management system and avoid a late penalty, the project manager installed a cheaper energy management system. The less
  expensive system could not reduce power to the air circulation fans during peak electrical price periods, and it was not
  compatible with other campus systems. Five years after the building was built, when a central control unit was installed to
  coordinate building energy consumption, the incompatible system was replaced because it could not communicate with the
  central campus energy control system or save as much in electrical costs. The university did not take the time to specify the
  quality of the building control system in the scope statement and was not aware of the implication of the substitution at the
  time it was made. As a result, the cost of quality was lower in the prevention category but much higher in the cost of failure
  category. Because the parties acted in their own interests instead of the interest of the total university and quality was not a
  team effort, waste occurred and total cost increased.

Some separation of responsibility for quality is necessary. For example, if a project is undertaken to build a facility that makes
something, it is important to distinguish between the quality of the work done by the project team and the quality of the items
produced after the project is over. The client provides specifications for the facility that should result in production of quality
products. It is the client's responsibility to provide appropriate project requirements that will result in a facility that can produce
quality products. It is the project manager's responsibility to meet the project requirements. The project manager must focus on
meeting requirements for project activities, but as part of the quality team, opportunities to improve the quality of the final product
should be discussed with the client. If the final products fail to meet quality standards, someone will be blamed for the failure. It
could be the project manager, even if he or she met all the requirements of the project specified by the client.

  Cost of Prevention in Safety Training

  An electronic parts manufacturer chooses to expand operations and needs to hire and train fifty employees. It uses its own
  human resources department to handle the selection and hiring of the employees, but it contracts with a nearby technical
  college to provide some of the training. The technical college is responsible for designing and delivering training on the topic
  of plant safety practices. The objective of the training project is to reduce the number of workplace accidents, but that is not the
  characteristic by which the quality of the training program is determined because the rate of accidents for employees who go
  through the training will not be known until after they have been employed for months or years. The criteria for determining
  the quality of the training must be something that can be controlled and measured by the project manager during the project.

Because projects are time sensitive, meeting activity finish dates is a common characteristic of quality work on a project that is not
typical of a requirement of a process manager.

  Timely Delivery Part of Quality

  At a remote mining site in South America, the gasoline and diesel fuel must be brought in by truck over poorly maintained
  roads to run the trucks and heavy equipment used to set up an ore processing facility. The vendor for supplying fuel is required
  to provide fuel in the right grades for the various vehicles, in the appropriate quantities, and in a timely manner. If fuel of the
  right type and grade, with acceptable levels of impurities, is delivered a week after the vehicles have run out of fuel, the work
  on the fuel-delivery activity is of low quality.

Key Takeaways
    Both project and process quality management require commitment from all employees, including top management. They are
    both client oriented and prevention oriented.
    Projects are temporary and allow fewer opportunities to improve repetitive processes. Cost of prevention is often part of the
    project budget, but the cost of failure usually happens after the project is completed. This separation of costs and benefits can
    lead to taking short-term savings on the project at the expense of higher cost of failure after the project is complete.

10.3.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24711
Exercises

 1. How is quality control of a project different from quality control of a manufacturing process?

Cost of Failure after the Project

Consider a project you have been involved in, in which the cost of prevention would be part of the project budget but the cost of
failure would be incurred after the project was completed. Describe why you think top management would have to be involved to
make the best decision for the company.

This page titled 10.3: Relevance of Quality Programs to Project Quality is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed,
and/or curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

10.3.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24711
10.4: Planning and Controlling Project Quality

  Learning Objectives

    1. Define statistical measurement terminology.
    2. Identify sources of information for the planning process.
    3. Identify and describe the techniques for controlling project quality.
    4. Describe the results of planning and controlling quality.

High quality is achieved by planning for it rather than by reacting to problems after they are identified. Standards are chosen and
processes are put in place to achieve those standards.

Measurement Terminology

During the execution phase of the project, services and products are sampled and measured to determine if the quality is within
control limits for the requirements and to analyze causes for variations. This evaluation is often done by a separate quality control
group, and knowledge of a few process measurement terms is necessary to understand their reports. Several of these terms are
similar, and it is valuable to know the distinction between them.

The quality plan specifies the control limits of the product or process; the size of the range between those limits is the tolerance.
Tolerances are often written as the mean value, plus or minus the tolerance. The plus and minus signs are written together, .

  Tolerance in Gasoline Production

  The petroleum refinery chose to set its control limits for 87 octane gasoline at 86 and 88 octane. The tolerance is 87  1.

Tools are selected that can measure the samples closely enough to determine if the measurements are within control limits and if
they are showing a trend. Each measurement tool has its own tolerances. For example, if a machine is making rods whose
diameters should be 10 mm  0.01 mm, you need a measuring device that can accommodate a rod that is 10 mm wide but can
measure that width to a much smaller tolerance than 0.01 mm, such as 0.001 mm.

The choice of tolerance directly affects the cost of quality (COQ). In general, it costs more to produce and measure products that
have small tolerances. The costs associated with making products with small tolerances for variation can be very high and not
proportional to the gains. For example, it might double the manufacturing cost to improve a process from a 4  to a 5  (lower
tolerances from 25 percent of control limits to 20 percent), which might only reduce the number of parts that are out of control
from 4 per 100,000 to 6 per 10 million (see Figure 10.4 "Meaning of Sigma Levels"). The cost of failure of only 4 parts per
100,000 might be much less than the cost of prevention.

Defining and Meeting Client Expectations

Clients provide specifications for the project that must be met for the project to be successful. Meeting project specifications is one
definition of a project success. Clients often have expectations that are more difficult to capture in a written specification. For
example, one client will want to be invited to every meeting of the project and will then select the ones that seem most relevant.
Another client will want to only be invited to project meetings that need client input. Inviting this client to every meeting will cause
unnecessary frustration. Listening to the client and developing an understanding of the expectations that are not easily captured in
specifications is important to meeting the client's expectations.

Project surveys that capture how the client perceives the project performance provide the project team with data that is useful in
meeting client expectation. If the results of the surveys indicate that the client is not pleased with some aspect of the project, the
project team has the opportunity to explore the reasons for this perception with the client and develop recovery plans. The survey
can also help define what is going well and what needs improved.

10.4.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24712
Sources of Planning Information

Planning for quality is part of the initial planning process. The early scope, budget, and schedule estimates are used to identify
processes, services, or products where the expected grade and quality should be specified. Risk analysis is used to determine which
of the risks the project faces could affect quality.

Techniques

Several different tools and techniques are available for planning and controlling the quality of a project. The extent to which these
tools are used is determined by the project complexity and the quality management program in use by the client.

Quality Management Methodology

The quality management methodology required by the client is used. The project manager must provide the documentation the
client needs to prove compliance with their methodology. There are several different quality management methodologies, but they
usually have characteristics that are similar to the ones described previously in the text.

Flowcharting

Many processes are more complicated than a simple sequence of related events that include several different paths. A flowchart
uses standard symbols to diagram a process that has branches or loops. Diamonds indicate decisions, and arrows indicate the
direction of the flow of the process, as shown in Figure 10.8 "Flowchart of a Quality Control Process".

10.4.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24712
                                                         Figure 10.8 Flowchart of a Quality Control Process

The process used to plan and assess quality can be described using flowcharts. They are useful for communicating processes that
have logical branches that can be determined by simple yes or no questions. Flowcharting is also useful for discovering
misunderstanding in project roles and responsibilities and communicating responsibility for work processes.

Benchmarking

When products like shoes were made by hand, artisans would seek some degree of standardization by marking standard lengths for
different parts of the product on their workbench. In modern management practice, if a particular method or product is a standard
of quality, comparing your organization's quality plan to it is called benchmarking. If a product or service is similar to something
that is done in another industry or by a competitor, the project planners can look at the best practices that are used by others and use
them as a comparison.

Cost-to-Benefit Analysis

Because the cost of prevention is more often part of the project budget, the case must be made for increasing the project budget to
raise quality. Some quality management programs, like Six Sigma, require that expenditures for quality are justified using a cost-to-

10.4.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24712
benefit analysis that is similar to calculating the cost of quality, except that it is a ratio of cost of increasing quality to the resulting
benefit. A cost-benefit analysis in some quality programs can take into account nonfinancial factors such as client loyalty and
improvements to corporate image and the cost-to-benefit analysis takes the form of a written analysis rather than a simple numeric
ratio. It is similar to determining the cost of quality (COQ).

Design of Experiments

Measuring for quality of manufactured products or use of repetitive processes requires taking samples. Specialists in quality control
design a test regimen that complies with statistical requirements to be sure that enough samples are taken to be reasonably
confident that the analysis is reliable. In project management, the testing experiments are designed as part of the planning phase
and then used to collect data during the execution phase.

Control Charts

If some of the functions of a project are repetitive, statistical process controls can be used to identify trends and keep the processes
within control limits. Part of the planning for controlling the quality of repetitive processes is to determine what the control limits
are and how the process will be sampled.

Cause and Effect Diagrams

When control charts indicate an assignable cause for a variation, it is not always easy to identify the cause of a problem.
Discussions that are intended to discover the cause can be facilitated using a cause-and-effect or fishbone diagram where
participants are encouraged to identify possible causes of a defect.

  Diagramming Quality Problems

  For example, a small manufacturing firm tries to identify the assignable causes to variations in its manufacturing line. They
  assemble a team that identifies six possibilities, as shown in the fishbone diagram below.

                                                                 Figure 10.9 Cause and Effect Diagram

Each branch of the diagram can be expanded to break down a category into more specific items.
    An engineer and the electrician work on one of the branches to consider possible causes of power fluctuation and add detail to
    their part of the fishbone diagram, as shown below.

10.4.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24712
                                                            Figure 10.10 Possible Causes of Power Fluctuation

Check Sheets, Histograms, and Pareto Charts

When several quality problems need to be solved, a project manager must choose which ones to address first. One way to prioritize
quality problems is to determine which ones occur most frequently. This data can be collected using a check sheet, which is a basic
form on which the user can make a check in the appropriate box each time a problem occurs or by automating the data collection
process using the appropriate technology. Once the data are collected, they can be analyzed by creating a type of frequency
distribution chart called a histogram. A true histogram is a column chart where the width of the columns fill the available space on
the horizontal axis and are proportional to the category values displayed on the x axis, while the height of the columns is
proportional to the frequency of occurrences. Most histograms use one width of column to represent a category, while the vertical
axis represents the frequency of occurrence.

  Charting Electrical Problems

  The engineer and electrician place a recording meter on the electrical supply to the manufacturing area and instruct the
  building automation system to keep a log of voltage coming into the plant from the local utility and when it starts and stops
  large electrical fan motors. They create a check sheet to track the number of times that power dips or spikes due to lighting
  strikes or electric space heater malfunctions. They collect the data, count the number of occurrences in each category, and then
  chart the number of occurrences in a histogram, as shown below.

10.4.5  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24712
                                       Figure 10.11 Histogram Showing Frequency of Power Problems by Likely Cause

A variation on the histogram is a frequency distribution chart invented by economist Vilfredo Pareto known as a Pareto chart, in
which the columns are arranged in decreasing order with the most common on the left and a line added that shows the cumulative
total. The combination of columns and a line allows the user to tell at a glance which problems are most frequent and what fraction
of the total they represent.

  Using Pareto Chart to Analyze Voltage Problem

  The engineer creates a Pareto chart by sorting the data and adds a line to show total problems, as shown below. He concludes
  that about half of the electrical voltage problems are caused when one of the large electrical fan motors on the same circuit as
  the manufacturing line is shut down to conserve electricity by the energy management system and then restarted.

                           Figure 10.12 Pareto Chart with Problems in Decreasing Order and a Line Showing a Cumulative Total

Planning and Control Results

The quality plan is produced during the initiation phase. The methods, procedures, and logic are described to demonstrate a
commitment to a project of high quality. The plan identifies the products or services that will be measured and how they will be
measured and compared to benchmarks. A flowchart demonstrates the logic and pathways to improve the plan.

During the execution phase, data are collected by measuring samples according to the design specified in the plan. The data are
charted and analyzed. If variations are due to assignable causes, change requests are created.

Key Takeaways
    Statistical control terms that are commonly used are tolerance (the range between control limits), flowchart (a diagram showing
    decision branches and loops), benchmarking (comparison to best practices), fishbone diagram (shows possible causes of quality

10.4.6  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24712
    problems), check sheet (form used to record frequency of problem occurrences), histogram (column chart that shows frequency
    of problems), and Pareto chart (histogram sorted by frequency from highest to smallest with a line that shows total cumulative
    problems).
    The quality planning process uses initial scope, budget, and schedule estimates to identify areas that need quality management.
    Control of quality in repetitive processes use statistical control methods that involve designing testing while considering the
    cost of quality, taking measurements, and then analyzing the data using run charts that show control limits and trends.
    Methodologies are compared to the best practices by competitors, which is called benchmarking. Errors are documented using
    check sheets and analyzed using fishbone diagrams, histograms, or Pareto charts.
    The products of planning and controlling quality are a quality management plan, data, analysis documents, and proposals for
    improvement

Exercises

 1. The range from the mean to either control limit is the __________.
 2. A diagram that shows branches and loops based on decisions is a ____ _____. (two words)
 3. The best practices in an industry to which a company can compare its practices are called ___________.
 4. What is the difference between a histogram and a Pareto chart?

Quality Management Plan

Consider a project in which you have been involved where there was a quality management plan or where such a plan was missing.
Describe the effect of having or not having such a plan.

This page titled 10.4: Planning and Controlling Project Quality is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

10.4.7  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24712
10.5: Assuring Quality

  Learning Objectives

    1. Describe the purpose and methods of quality assurance.

The purpose of quality assurance is to create confidence that the quality plan and controls are working properly. To assure quality,
time must be allocated to review the original quality plan and compare that plan to how quality is being created during the
execution of the project.

Process Analysis

The flowcharts of quality processes are compared to the processes followed during actual operations. If the plan was not followed,
the process is analyzed and corrective action taken. The corrective action could be to educate the people involved on how to follow
the quality plan or to revise the plan.

The experiments that sample products and processes and collect data are examined to see if they are following statistically valid
sampling techniques and that the measurement methods have small enough tolerances to detect variation within control limits.

Because projects are temporary, there are fewer opportunities to learn and improve within one project if it has a short duration, but
even in short projects, the quality manager should have a way to learn from experience and change the process for the next project
of a similar complexity profile.

  Analyzing Quality Processes in Safety Training

  The technical college responsible for training employees in safe plant practices evaluates its instructor selection process at the
  end of the training to see if it had the best criteria for selection. For example, it required the instructors to have Masters degrees
  in manufacturing to qualify as college instructors. The college used an exit survey of the students to ask what they thought
  would improve the instruction of future classes on this topic. Some students felt that it would be more important to require that
  the instructors have more years of training experience, while others recommended that the college seek certification as a
  training center by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) (Occupational Safety and Health
  Administration, 2007). The college considered these suggestions and decided to retain its requirement of a Masters degree but
  add a requirement that the instructor be certified by OSHA in plant safety.

Quality Audit

For additional confidence and assurance, an outside group can come in and review the quality procedures and accuracy of the data.
This process is similar to a financial audit and is called a quality audit. The purpose of a quality audit is to compare the stated
quality goals of the project against the actual practice and procedures that are used. It is not a certification of the quality of the
products themselves.

Key Takeaway
    The purpose of quality assurance is to build confidence in the client that quality standards and procedures are being followed.
    This is done by an internal review of the plan, testing, and revisions policies or by an audit of the same items performed by an
    external group or agency.

Exercises

 1. How is a quality audit different from a quality plan?

Customer Confidence

Consider a product that has suffered from a failure in its quality. Describe how the company handled the problem and its effect on
your personal perception of the company and your confidence in buying its products.

10.5.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24713
References

Occupational Safety and Health Administration, OSHA Training Institute Education Center Fact Sheet, July 3, 2007,
www.osha.gov/dte/oti/index.html (accessed August 7, 2009).

This page titled 10.5: Assuring Quality is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

10.5.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24713
10.6: Exercises

Exercises at the end of the chapter are designed to strengthen your understanding and retention of the information recently acquired
in the chapter.

Essay Questions

Write several paragraphs to provide more in-depth analysis and consideration when answering the following questions.

 1. Describe the difference between chance cause and assignable cause. How do these terms relate to Deming's system of profound
    knowledge?

 2. According to the text, why did the quality of manufactured goods decline in the United States after World War II, and how did
    Japan take advantage of that situation?

 3. Describe the four Japanese terms used in TQM and give an example of how they might apply to a particular product.

Discussion

The exercises in this section are designed to promote exchange of information among students in the classroom or in an online
discussion. The exercises are more open ended, which means that what you find might be completely different from what your
classmates find, and you can all benefit by sharing what you have learned.

 1. The auto industry has been a highly visible battleground for international competition in which quality and the public's
    perception of a company's quality have played an important role. Deming stresses that management is 85 percent of the
    problem and the solution to a company's quality. What are specific examples with which you are familiar from the news or
    personal experience that demonstrate management leadership (or lack of leadership) toward improving quality.

 2. Consider how the four Japanese concepts of quality included in TQM are applied in your educational institution. Based on your
    experience with the management of your school, does the management use the principles of kaizen, atarimae hinshitsu, kansei,
    and miryokuteki hinshitsu? Provide an example (or counter example) of each.

This page titled 10.6: Exercises is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

10.6.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24714
10.7: Software and Technology Exercises

  Learning Objectives

    1. Predict likely range of values in a normal distribution.
    2. Recognize assignable and unassignable causes of statistical variation.

Predicting Value Ranges Using Standard Deviation

Real production processes are never perfect. In some cases, a few products that are too small or that do not work will just cause
inconvenience, but in other cases they might be life threatening. Samples of the production process will show how much variation
occurs. If it appears that the variations are distributed equally above and below the mean (average), it might be assumed that the
statistics of a normal distribution can be used to predict the percentage of products that will be defective when many of them are
produced even if none of the samples are defective.

Some projects are initiated to increase the quality by reducing the variation in production. To understand the language of statistics
and how it is used to justify a project, it is useful to gain a "feel" for how the distribution of samples is described by the standard
deviation. A spreadsheet can be used to simulate samples of production runs where the mean and standard deviation can be chosen
to show their relationship in a normal distribution. By trying different values for the standard deviation and observing the effect on
the distribution of estimated samples in a chart, you can develop a sense of how the two are related.

Recall that a standard deviation is called a sigma and represented by the Greek letter  and the 68-95-99.7 rule refers to the
percentage of samples that will be within one, two, and three standard deviations of the mean.

Examine a Normal Distribution

Complete the exercise by following these instructions:

 1. Navigate to the directory location where the exercise files for this unit are located and open Ch10STD.xls in a spreadsheet
    program such as MS Excel.

 2. In cell A2, replace StudentName with your name.
 3. This worksheet is designed to simulate a set of sample values that vary from the mean for random reasons and form a normal

    distribution. The data and calculations in columns A through F are hidden. They are used to calculate the values in column G on
    which the chart is based.
 4. Notice the following features of the spreadsheet:

        Column A has bins. In this example, the bins are .1 units wide. The size of the bin and the horizontal scale of the chart are
        determined by the value in cell L5.
        This simulation uses forty-two bins that are distributed equally above and below the mean. The mean value can be specified
        in cell L4.
        The usual method is to sample a sequence of products, count the number that fall into each bin, and then calculate the
        standard deviation. In this simulation, you can specify the standard deviation in cell L3, and the percentage of samples that
        are likely to occur in each bin is calculated and displayed in column G. The display is rounded to a whole percent. The
        display of decimal places can be increased using the spreadsheet's controls.
        The percentage of estimated samples that occur in each bin is charted using a column chart. The scale at the left side of the
        chart indicates the percent of the samples in each bin.

 5. Compare the chart in the spreadsheet to the chart in Figure 10.13 "Normal Distribution of Gasoline Samples" that was used in
    the text. Observe that the standard deviation, , is .2 and that almost all the sample values occur between 86.4 and 87.6--three 
    on either side of the mean.

 6. Open a word processing document and then save it as Ch10STDStudentName.doc. Switch back to the spreadsheet and capture
    the screen. Switch to the word processing document and paste the screen into the document.

 7. Switch back to the spreadsheet. To see the effect of a better production process that would have a  of .1 instead of .2, click cell
    L3. Type .1 and then, on the Formula bar, click the Enter button. The distribution narrows so that almost all the estimated

10.7.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24715
    samples are within .3 on either side of the mean (87.0), as shown in Figure 10.14 "Normal Distribution with Smaller Standard
    Deviation".
 8. Capture the screen showing in the narrow distribution and paste it into the word processing document.
 9. In the spreadsheet, in cell L3, type .4 and then, on the Formula bar, click the Enter button. Notice that a larger standard
    deviation means the distribution is more spread out. Three standard deviations is 1.2 (3  .4), so almost all the samples will be
    within 1.2 on either side of the mean, as shown in Figure 10.15 "Normal Distribution with Larger Standard Deviation".
10. Capture this screen and paste it into the word processing document.
11. Change the value in cell L3 to 1. Almost all the samples will be above 84 (87-3) and below 90 (87+3), but the horizontal scale
    is too small to show all the values.
12. Change the value in cell L5 to .3.
13. Capture the screen and paste it into the word processing document.

Use the Spreadsheet for a Different Example

The effects of a lower-than-expected octane rating in a passenger car might be engine knock during acceleration and less power
climbing a hill, but the effect of lower-than-expected octane fuel in a military aircraft might mean that the plane could not achieve
the desired altitude or speed in a critical situation. Aviation gasoline is designed for use in high-performance engines that require
100 octane fuel. Use the spreadsheet to examine the estimated distribution of gasoline samples with a different mean and .

Examine a Normal Distribution

Complete the exercise by following these instructions:

1. Change the value in cell L4 to 100 and the standard deviation in cell L3 to .1. Notice that a standard deviation of .1 means that
   99.7 percent of the gasoline samples will be between 99.7 and 100.3 octane.

2. Practice changing the mean and standard deviation values in the spreadsheet. Each time you do so, predict the high and low
   values that represent three  above and below the mean and use the spreadsheet to check your prediction. If the values extend
   beyond the sides of the chart, increase the increment value in cell L5.

3. Capture the screen that shows one of your estimates that is different from the examples shown in the previous steps and paste it
   into the word processing document.

4. In the word processing document, below the last screen, write between one hundred and two hundred words to describe what
   you learned about the relationship between the standard deviation and the distribution of likely values. Specifically describe
   how you predict the upper and lower limits of the range.

5. Close the spreadsheet. Do not save the changes.
6. Save the word processing document as Ch10STDStudentName.doc.
7. Review your work and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

Element                         Best                            Adequate          Poor

File name                       Ch10STDStudentName.doc Same or .docx file format  Student name missing

Predict likely range of values  Five screen captures plus a     Same as Best      Missing pictures; essay does
in a normal distribution        reflective essay on what you                      not describe how the upper and
                                learned about predicting the                      lower limits of 3  are
                                upper and lower limits defined                    calculated
                                by 3 

 8. Revise the document, if necessary. Save the document and submit it as directed by the instructor.

Recognizing Variations Due to Unassignable and Assignable Causes

W. Edwards Deming teaches that some variation is inevitable due to chance cause. A manager needs to recognize the difference
between variations that are due to chance and those that indicate the presence of an assignable cause or a trend. If it appears that
there is an assignable cause for variation in quality, a project manager might be required to identify and fix the problem. To

                                                        10.7.2                    https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24715
communicate with process managers who are monitoring and sampling production, it is useful to understand the use of control
charts.

A run chart is a type of chart that shows variations from the mean as a function of time. The value of each sample is plotted to show
the day it was taken and how it differs from the mean. If the variation is random, there will be roughly the same number of points
above and below the mean.

A spreadsheet can be used to simulate random variations in production. In this exercise, the spreadsheet uses its random number
function to pick two numbers that are positive and two that are negative and adds them to the mean. Each number represents a
variation that is between the control limits. Most of the time the positive and negative numbers cancel each other out and result in a
sum that is close to the mean, but occasionally the four random factors add up to values that are far from the mean.

In this part of the exercise, you observe variations in a run chart and frequency distribution chart that are due to random effects.
You generate the random numbers several times to see what production runs with random (unassignable) variations look like.

Examine a Run Chart with Random Effects

Complete the exercise by following these instructions:

 1. Navigate to the directory location where the exercise files for this unit are located and open Ch10ControlChart.xls in a
    spreadsheet program such as MS Excel.

 2. Observe that in cells B4 through B23 the RAND function is used to simulate the effects of four random influences on each day
    of production for a twenty-day period.

 3. Scroll the screen or adjust the zoom so that you can see both charts. See Figure 10.16 "Screen Adjusted to Show Both Charts".
 4. On your keyboard, near the top, press the F9 key. The random functions pick new numbers. Observe how the samples on the

    run chart change and how the frequency distribution changes.
 5. Press the F9 key several more times until you get a set of samples that are grouped close to the mean like the example shown in

    Figure 10.17 "Most Samples near the Mean".
 6. Open a word processing document and then save it as Ch10RunChartStudentName.doc. Switch back to the spreadsheet and

    capture the screen. Switch to the word processing document and paste the screen into the document. Your values will differ
    from those in the figure.
 7. According to Deming, it is not productive to hold employees to quality standards that they do not control. Consider the effect on
    employee moral if this set of samples was taken as the standard by which the next run would be judged.
 8. Press the F9 key again and stop at a set of samples that has a greater variation, such as the example shown in Figure 10.15
    "Normal Distribution with Larger Standard Deviation".
 9. Capture this screen and paste it into Ch10RunChartStudentName.doc. Because of the chance-cause random factors, this set of
    data has more variation. If employee performance were punished or rewarded based on this data, they would become
    discouraged because they do not control the quality. Leave both files open.

Examine a Run Chart with Assignable Cause

Complete the exercise by following these instructions:

An assignable cause can be mixed in with the chance-cause random effects. In this part, you introduce a factor that causes the
samples to display a trend. You run the simulation several times to learn how to recognize a set of data that is a mix of random
(chance-cause) factors and a trend that is probably from an assignable cause.

 1. In the spreadsheet, click cell B2. Type .03 and then, on the Formula bar, click the Enter button. The random functions are
    recalculated, but each value is increased by .03 over its predecessor.

 2. Press the F9 key several times and observe how this trend appears within the samples such as the example in Figure 10.19
    "Trend That Is Probably Due to an Assignable Cause".

 3. It is clear that action must be taken soon to prevent the next batch of samples from exceeding the control limit. The process
    manager might create a project to identify the assignable cause and take the necessary action, such as replacing a worn-out
    piece of equipment. Choose an example where the upward trend is most apparent. Capture the screen and paste it into the word
    processing document.

10.7.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24715
4. Close the spreadsheet without saving the changes.
5. In the word processing document, below the last picture, write a reflective essay of between one hundred and two hundred

   words that describes how you would recognize the difference between run charts that show assignable and unassignable causes.
   Discuss the effect on morale if one of the runs with random values that are close to the mean is chosen as the standard of
   performance by which workers would be measured.
6. Leave the word processing document open.
7. Review your work and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

Element                   Best                            Adequate                   Poor

File name                 Ch10RunChartStudentName.d       Ch10RunChartStudentName.d  Did not include name in file
                          oc                              ocx                        name

Recognize assignable and  Three screen captures that      Same as Best               Missing screen; essay does not
unassignable causes of    show two random causes and                                 address both requirements
statistical variation     one assignable cause; an essay
                          that describes how to
                          recognize the difference and
                          the effect on worker morale if
                          a run with low random
                          variation is chosen as a
                          standard

 8. Save the file and submit it as directed by the instructor.

This page titled 10.7: Software and Technology Exercises is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                10.7.4                                               https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24715
CHAPTER OVERVIEW

11: Managing Project Risk

  11.1: Defining Risk
  11.2: Risk Management Process
  11.3: Project Risk by Phases
  11.4: Project Risk and the Project Complexity Profile
  11.5: Exercises
  11.6: Web Exercise
This page titled 11: Managing Project Risk is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                                                                              1
11.1: Defining Risk

  Learning Objectives

    1. Define project risk.
    2. Define the difference between known and unknown risks.
    3. Describe the difference between the business risk of the organization and project risk.

Risk is the possibility of loss or injury (Merriam-Webster Online, 2009).Project risk is an uncertain event or condition that, if it
occurs, has an effect on at least one project objective (Project Management Institute, Inc., 2008).Risk management focuses on
identifying and assessing the risks to the project and managing those risks to minimize the impact on the project. There are no risk-
free projects because there is an infinite number of events that can have a negative effect on the project. Risk management is not
about eliminating risk but about identifying, assessing, and managing risk.

Tzvi Raz, Aaron Shenhar, and Dov Dvir (Raz, Shenhar, & Dvir, 2002). studied the risk management practices on one hundred
projects in a variety of industries. The results of this study suggested the following about risk management practices:

    Risk management is not widely used.
    The projects that were most likely to have a risk management plan were those that were perceived to be high risk.
    When risk management practices were applied to projects, they appeared to be positively related to the success of the project.
    The risk management approach influenced the meeting of project schedules and cost goals but exerted less influence on project
    product quality.
    Good risk management increases the likelihood of a successful project.

Risk deals with the uncertainty of events that could affect the project. Some potential negative project events have a high likelihood
of occurring on specific projects. Examples are as follows:

    Safety risks are common on construction projects.
    Changes in the value of local currency during a project affect purchasing power and budgets on projects with large international
    components.
    Projects that depend on good weather, such as road construction or coastal projects, face risk of delays due to exceptionally wet
    or windy weather.

These are examples of known risks. Known risks are events that have been identified and analyzed for which advanced planning is
possible. Other risks are unknown or unforeseen.

  Terrorist Attack

  On September 11, 2001, project team members were flying from various locations to a project review meeting in South
  Carolina when all flights were cancelled because of the attacks on the World Trade Center. Members of the leadership team
  could not make the meeting or return to their home base, and progress on the project, like many projects that day, was delayed.

  Sudden Family Death

  Just before a project meeting in Texas, the engineering lead received word that his father had died in the middle of the night.
  The team delayed making decisions on some critical engineering events without the knowledge and judgment of the
  engineering manager.

  Whole Crew Fails Drug Test

  On a project in Texas, the entire twelve-member masonry crew failed the drug screening test even though they had been told
  that drug screening was required on the project.

11.1.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24716
These events were unforeseen by the project team, and in all three cases the projects experienced schedule delays and additional
costs.

Project risks are separate from the organizational risks that are associated with the business purpose of the project.

A project was chartered to design and construct a copper mine at a cost not to exceed $1.2 billion. If a project is completed on time,
within budget, and meets all quality specifications, the project is successful. If the price of copper drops below the profit threshold
for the company, the organizational goals of the project may not be achieved. The price of copper is an organizational or business
risk. The copper mining company authorized the project based on assumptions about the future price of copper. The price of copper
is not a project risk on this project.

Key Takeaways
    Project risk is the possible outcome that planned events on the project will not occur as planned or that unplanned events will
    occur that will have a negative impact on the project.
    Known risks can be identified before they occur, while unknown risks are unforeseen.
    Organizational risks are associated with the business purpose of the project and assumed by the client when deciding to do the
    project.

Exercises

 1. According to PMI, project risk is a(n) ___________ event or condition that, if it occurs, has an effect on at least one project
    objective.

 2. A risk such as the future market price of a commodity is an example of a(n) _________ risk.
 3. Define risk in your own words.
 4. Give an example of a known risk and an unknown risk that are different from those in the text.
 5. Describe the difference between organizational risk and project risk in your own words and give an example of each that is not

    used in the text.

Planning for Known and Unknown Risks

    Consider a trip that you might be planning. Describe at least five risks that are associated with taking the trip.

References

Merriam-Webster Online, s.v. "risk," http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/Risk (accessed August 21, 2009).

Project Management Institute, Inc., A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK Guide), 4th ed. (Newtown
Square, PA: Project Management Institute, Inc., 2008), 273.

Raz, T., Aaron J. Shenhar, and Dov Dvir, "Risk Management, Project Success, and Technological Uncertainty," R&D Management
32 (2002): 101-12.

This page titled 11.1: Defining Risk is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

11.1.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24716
11.2: Risk Management Process

  Learning Objectives

    1. Identify the major elements in managing project risk.
    2. Describe the processes for identifying project risk.
    3. Describe the processes for evaluating risk.
    4. Describe the processes for mitigating risk.

Managing risks on projects is a process that includes risk assessment and a mitigation strategy for those risks. Risk assessment
includes both the identification of potential risk and the evaluation of the potential impact of the risk. A risk mitigation plan is
designed to eliminate or minimize the impact of the risk events--occurrences that have a negative impact on the project.
Identifying risk is both a creative and a disciplined process. The creative process includes brainstorming sessions where the team is
asked to create a list of everything that could go wrong. All ideas are welcome at this stage with the evaluation of the ideas coming
later.

Risk Identification

A more disciplined process involves using checklists of potential risks and evaluating the likelihood that those events might happen
on the project. Some companies and industries developed risk checklists based on experience from past projects. The Construction
Industry Institute (Construction Indistry Institute Cost/ Schedule Task Force, 1989) developed a detailed checklist of potential risks
based on the experience of several large construction companies executing major construction projects. These checklists can be
helpful to the project manager and project team in identifying both specific risks on the checklist and expanding the thinking of the
team. The past experience of the project team, project experience within the company, and experts in the industry can be valuable
sources for identifying potential risk on a project.

Identifying the sources of risk by category is another method for exploring potential risk on a project. Some examples of categories
for potential risks include the following:

    Technical
    Cost
    Schedule
    Client
    Contractual
    Weather
    Financial
    Political
    Environmental
    People

The people category can be subdivided into risks associated with the people. Examples of people risks include the risk of not
finding the skills needed to execute the project or the sudden unavailability of key people on the project. David Hillson (Hillson,
2003) uses the same framework as the work breakdown structure (WBS) for developing a risk breakdown structure (RBS). A risk
breakdown structure organizes the risks that have been identified into categories using a table with increasing levels of detail to the
right.

  Risks in John's Move

  In John's move, John makes a list of things that might go wrong with his project and uses his work breakdown structure as a
  guide. A partial list for the planning portion of the RBS is shown below.

  Figure 11.1 Risk Breakdown Structure (RBS)

11.2.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24717
Level 1    Level 2                             Level 3
Plan Move  Contact Dion and Carlita            Dion backs out
                                               Carlita backs out
           Host planning lunch                 No common date available
           Develop and distribute schedule     Restaurant full or closed
           Make hotel arrangements in Atlanta  Wrong choice of ethnic food
                                               Dion or Carlita have special food allergies
                                               or preferences
                                               Printer out of toner
                                               Out of paper
                                               City hotels full due to major event
                                               Lost reservation

The result is a more obvious understanding of where risks are most concentrated. Hillson's approach helps the project team identify
known risks but can be restrictive and less creative in identifying unknown risks and risks not easily found inside the work

breakdown structure.

Risk Evaluation

After the potential risks have been identified, the project team then evaluates the risk based on the probability that the risk event
will occur and the potential loss associated with the event. Not all risks are equal. Some risk events are more likely to happen than
others, and the cost of a risk event can vary greatly. Evaluating the risk for probability of occurrence and the severity or the
potential loss to the project is the next step in the risk management process.

The Construction Industry Institute conducted a study of large construction project risk evaluation and categorized risk according
to the potential impact of project costs. High-impact risk consisted of risks that could increase the project costs by 5 percent of the
conceptual budget or 2 percent of the detailed budget. Only thirty potential risk events met these criteria. These were the critical
few potential risk events that the project management team focused on when developing a project risk mitigation or management
plan. Risk evaluation is about developing an understanding of which potential risks have the greatest possibility of occurring and
can have the greatest negative impact on the project. These become the critical few.

           11.2.2                              https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24717
                                                                       Figure 11.2 Risk and Impact

There is a positive correlation--both increase or decrease together--between project risk and project complexity. A project with
new and emerging technology will have a high-complexity rating and a correspondingly high risk. The project management team
will assign the appropriate resources to the technology managers to assure the accomplishment of project goals. The more complex
the technology, the more resources the technology manager typically needs to meet project goals, and each of those resources could
face unexpected problems.

Risk evaluation often occurs in a workshop setting. Building on the identification of the risks, each risk event is analyzed to
determine the likelihood of occurring and the potential cost if it did occur. The likelihood and impact are both rated as high,
medium, or low. A risk mitigation plan addresses the items that have high ratings on both factors--likelihood and impact.

  Risk Analysis of Equipment Delivery

  For example, a project team analyzed the risk of some important equipment not arriving to the project on time. The team
  identified three pieces of equipment that were critical to the project and would significantly increase the costs of the project if
  they were late in arriving. One of the vendors, who was selected to deliver an important piece of equipment, had a history of
  being late on other projects. The vendor was good and often took on more work than it could deliver on time. This risk event
  (the identified equipment arriving late) was rated as high likelihood with a high impact. The other two pieces of equipment
  were potentially a high impact on the project but with a low probably of occurring.

Not all project mangers conduct a formal risk assessment on the project. There are barriers to identifying risks. David Parker and
Alison Mobey (Parker & Mobey, 2004) found in a phenomenological study of project managers that there was a low understanding
of the tools and benefits of a structured analysis of project risks. The lack of formal risk management tools was seen as a barrier to
implementing a risk management program. The level of investment in formal risk management was also associated with managerial
psychological dimensions.

Some project managers are more proactive and will develop elaborate risk management programs for their projects. Other
managers are reactive and are more confident in their ability to handle unexpected events without prior planning, while some
managers are risk averse and prefer to be optimistic and not consider risks or to avoid taking risks whenever possible.

11.2.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24717
On projects with a low complexity profile, the project manager may informally track items that may be considered risk items. On
more complex projects, the project management team may develop a list of items perceived to be higher risk and track them during
project reviews. On projects with greater complexity, the process for evaluating risk is more formal with a risk assessment meeting
or series of meetings during the life of the project to assess risks at different phases of the project. On highly complex projects, an
outside expert may be included in the risk assessment process, and the risk assessment plan may take a more prominent place in the
project execution plan.

On complex projects, statistical models are sometimes used to evaluate risk because there are too many different possible
combinations of risks to calculate them one at a time. One example of the statistical model used on projects is the Monte Carlo
simulation, which simulates a possible range of outcomes by trying many different combinations of risks based on their likelihood.
The output from a Monte Carlo simulation provides the project team with the probability of an event occurring within a range and
for combinations of events. For example, the typical output from a Monte Carol simulation may reflect that there is a 10 percent
chance that one of the three important pieces of equipment will be late and that the weather will also be unusually bad after the
equipment arrives.

Risk Mitigation

After the risk has been identified and evaluated, the project team develops a risk mitigation plan, which is a plan to reduce the
impact of an unexpected event. The project team mitigates risks in the following ways:

    Risk avoidance
    Risk sharing
    Risk reduction
    Risk transfer

Each of these mitigation techniques can be an effective tool in reducing individual risks and the risk profile of the project. The risk
mitigation plan captures the risk mitigation approach for each identified risk event and the actions the project management team
will take to reduce or eliminate the risk.

Risk Avoidance

Risk avoidance usually involves developing an alternative strategy that has a higher probability of success but usually at a higher
cost associated with accomplishing a project task. A common risk avoidance technique is to use proven and existing technologies
rather than adopt new techniques, even though the new techniques may show promise of better performance or lower costs. A
project team may choose a vendor with a proven track record over a new vendor that is providing significant price incentives to
avoid the risk of working with a new vendor. The project team that requires drug testing for team members is practicing risk
avoidance by avoiding damage done by someone under the influence of drugs.

Risk Sharing

Risk sharing involves partnering with others to share responsibility for the risk activities. Many organizations that work on
international projects will reduce political, legal, labor, and others risk types associated with international projects by developing a
joint venture with a company located in that country. Partnering with another company to share the risk associated with a portion of
the project is advantageous when the other company has expertise and experience the project team does not have. If the risk event
does occur, then the partnering company absorbs some or all of the negative impact of the event. The company will also derive
some of the profit or benefit gained by a successful project.

  Risk Sharing on Pipeline in Peru

  One example of risk sharing is a large United States construction firm that won a contract to build a pipeline in Peru. The
  company partnered with a construction company in Peru with a reputation for performing on time. The Peruvian company
  brought local expertise and the U.S. company contributed the latest construction methods. If the project had not successfully
  completed on time, both companies would have received less profit, but the project was successful and both companies met
  profit targets.

11.2.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24717
Risk Reduction

Risk reduction is an investment of funds to reduce the risk on a project. On international projects, companies will often purchase
the guarantee of a currency rate to reduce the risk associated with fluctuations in the currency exchange rate. A project manager
may hire an expert to review the technical plans or the cost estimate on a project to increase the confidence in that plan and reduce
the project risk. Assigning highly skilled project personnel to manage the high-risk activities is another risk reduction method.
Experts managing a high-risk activity can often predict problems and find solutions that prevent the activities from having a
negative impact on the project. Some companies reduce risk by forbidding key executives or technology experts to ride on the same
airplane.

Risk Transfer

Risk transfer is a risk reduction method that shifts the risk from the project to another party. The purchase of insurance on certain
items is a risk transfer method. The risk is transferred from the project to the insurance company. A construction project in the
Caribbean may purchase hurricane insurance that would cover the cost of a hurricane damaging the construction site. The purchase
of insurance is usually in areas outside the control of the project team. Weather, political unrest, and labor strikes are examples of
events that can significantly impact the project and that are outside the control of the project team.

Contingency Plan

The project risk plan balances the investment of the mitigation against the benefit for the project. The project team often develops
an alternative method for accomplishing a project goal when a risk event has been identified that may frustrate the accomplishment
of that goal. These plans are called contingency plans. The risk of a truck drivers strike may be mitigated with a contingency plan
that uses a train to transport the needed equipment for the project. If a critical piece of equipment is late, the impact on the schedule
can be mitigated by making changes to the schedule to accommodate a late equipment delivery.

  Roof Left Unfinished for Late Equipment

  On one project, the project team left a section of a roof unfinished to allow the installation of equipment after the building was
  done and the roof installed. The equipment was late, and the project would have been delayed if the building was not
  completed. The project team left a section of the roof unfinished to allow the equipment to be placed in the building with the
  use of a crane. The roof was then completed, and the project finished on time.

    Contingency funds are funds set aside by the project team to address unforeseen events that cause the project costs to increase.
    Projects with a high-risk profile will typically have a large contingency budget. Although the amount of contingency allocated
    in the project budget is a function of the risks identified in the risk analysis process, contingency is typically managed as one
    line item in the project budget.

    Some project managers allocate the contingency budget to the items in the budget that have high risk rather than developing one
    line item in the budget for contingencies. This approach allows the project team to track the use of contingency against the risk
    plan. This approach also allocates the responsibility to manage the risk budget to the managers responsible for those line items.
    The availability of contingency funds in the line item budget may also increase the use of contingency funds to solve problems
    rather than finding alternative, less costly solutions. Most project managers, especially on more complex projects, will manage
    contingency funds at the project level, with approval of the project manager required before contingency funds can be used.

    Key Takeaways
        Risk management is a creative process that involves identifying, evaluating, and mitigating the impact of the risk event.
        Risk management can be very formal, with defined work processes, or informal, with no defined processes or methods.
        Formal risk evaluation includes the use of checklists, brainstorming, and expert input. A risk breakdown structure (RBS) can
        follow the work breakdown structure (WBS) to identify risk by activity.
        Risk evaluation prioritizes the identified risks by the likelihood and the potential impact if the event happens.
        Risk mitigation is the development and deployment of a plan to avoid, transfer, share, and reduce project risk. Contingency
        planning is the development of alternative plans to respond to the occurrence of a risk event.

11.2.5  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24717
   Exercises

     1. A risk ___________ plans eliminates or minimizes the impact of risk events.
     2. Risk management is a creative process that involves identifying, evaluating, and __________ the impact of risk events
     3. A process for risk assessment that is parallel to the WBS is a _________ _______ _______ (three words).
     4. Choose a project risk that could be related to the John's move example that is not described in the text and describe a

        mitigation plan for that risk. You may choose from any part of the John's move example that has been described in previous
        chapters.
     5. If you are planning a party at your residence, list three project risks and rate each of them for their potential impact and
        likelihood. Use high, medium, and low.
     6. Describe the similarities and differences between risk transfer and risk sharing.

    Risk Management

        Assume that you are involved in planning a wedding. What are three risks that might affect the ceremony or reception, and
        how would you mitigate the impact of those risks? For example, if you are planning an outdoor wedding, describe the
        backup plan in case of rain.

References

Construction Industry Institute Cost/Schedule Task Force, Management of Project Risks and Uncertainties (Austin, TX:
Construction Industry Institute, 1989).

Hillson, D., "Using a Risk Breakdown Structure in Project Management," Journal of Facilities Management 2, no. 1 (2003): 85-
97.

Parker, D. and Alison Mobey, "Action Research to Explore Perceptions of Risk in Project Management," International Journal of
Productivity and Performance Management 53, no. 1 (2004): 18-32.

This page titled 11.2: Risk Management Process is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

11.2.6  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24717
11.3: Project Risk by Phases

  Learning Objectives

    1. Describe the elements of risk management during the initiation phase.
    2. Describe the elements of risk management during the planning phase.
    3. Describe the elements of risk management during the execution phase.
    4. Describe the elements of risk management during the closeout phase.

Project risk is dealt with in different ways depending on the phase of the project.

Initiation Phase

Risk is associated with things that are unknown. More things are unknown at the beginning of a project, but risk must be
considered in the initiation phase and weighed against the potential benefit of the project's success in order to decide if the project
should be chosen.

  Risks by Phase in John's Move

  In the initiation phase of John's move, John considers the risk of events that could affect the whole project. He identifies the
  following risks during the initiation phase that might have a high impact and rates the likelihood of their happening from low
  to high.

    1. His new employer might change his mind and take back the job offer after he's given notice at his old job: Low.
    2. The current tenants of his apartment might not move out in time for him to move in by the first day of work at the new job:

       Medium.
    3. The movers might lose his furniture: Low.
    4. The movers might be more than a week late delivering his furniture: Medium.
    5. He might get in an accident driving from Chicago to Atlanta and miss starting his job: Low.

John considers how to mitigate each of the risks.

 1. During his job hunt, John had more than one offer, and he is confident that he could get another job, but he might lose deposit
    money on the apartment and the mover. He would also lose wages during the time it took to find the other job. To mitigate the
    risk of his new employer changing his mind, John makes sure that he keeps his relationships with his alternate employers
    cordial and writes to each of them thanking for their consideration in his recent interviews.

 2. John checks the market in Atlanta to determine the weekly cost and availability of extended-stay motels.
 3. John checks the mover's contract to confirm that they carry insurance against lost items, but they require the owner to provide a

    detailed list with value estimates and they limit the maximum total value. John decides to go through his apartment with his
    digital camera and take pictures of all of his possessions that will be shipped by truck and to keep the camera with him during
    the move so he has a visual record and won't have to rely on his memory to make a list. He seals and numbers the boxes so he
    can tell if a box is missing.
 4. If the movers are late, John can use his research on extended-stay motels to calculate how much it would cost. He checks the
    moving company's contract to see if they compensate the owner for late delivery, and he finds that they do not.
 5. John checks the estimated driving time from Chicago to Atlanta using an Internet mapping service and gets an estimate of
    eleven hours of driving time. He decides that it would be too risky to attempt to make the drive by himself in one day,
    especially if he didn't leave until after the truck was packed. John plans to spend one night on the road in a motel to reduce the
    risk of an accident caused by driving while too tired.

John concludes that the high-impact risks can be mitigated and the costs from the mitigation would be acceptable in order to get a
new job.

11.3.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24718
Planning Phase

Once the project is approved and it moves into the planning stage, risks are identified with each major group of activities. A risk
breakdown structure (RBS) can be used to identify increasing levels of detailed risk analysis.

  Risk Breakdown Structure for John's Move

  John decides to ask Dion and Carlita for their help during their first planning meeting to identify risks, rate their impact and
  likelihood, and suggest mitigation plans. They concentrate on the packing phase of the move. They fill out a table of risks, as
  shown below.

  Figure 11.5 Risk Breakdown Structure (RBS) for Packing John's Apartment

Legend:

RA: Risk Avoidance; RS: Risk Sharing; RR: Risk Reduction; RT: Risk Transfer

Level 1  Level 2               Level 3 -- Risks                              Mitigation
Packing  Pack Kitchen          Cuts from handling sharp
                               knives                                        Buy small boxes for packing
         Pack Living Room      Cuts from cracked glasses that                knives (RR)
         Pack Bedroom          break while being packed
         Pack Remaining Items  Transporting alcoholic                        Discard cracked glasses (RA)
                               beverages
                                                                             Give opened bottles to Dion or
                               Damage to antique furniture                   Carlita (RA)

                               Lose parts while taking apart                 Supervise wrapping and
                               the entertainment center                      loading personally (RR) and
                                                                             require movers to insure
                               Break most valuable                           against damage (RT)
                               electronics -- TV, DVD,
                               Tuner, Speakers                               Buy box of large freezer bags
                                                                             with a marker to bag and label
                               Break large mirror                            parts (RR)

                               Lose prescription drugs or                    Buy boxes of the right size
                               pack them where they cannot                   with sufficient bubble wrap
                               be found quickly                              (RR)

                               Damage to house plants                        Buy or rent a mirror-box with
                                                                             Styrofoam blocks at each
                               Transportation of flammable                   corner (RR)
                               liquids from charcoal grill
                                                                             Separate prescription drugs for
                                                                             transportation in the car (RA)

                                                                             Ask Carlita to care for them
                                                                             and bring them with her in her
                                                                             van when she visits in
                                                                             exchange for half of them (RS)

                                                                             Give to Dion or Carlita and
                                                                             buy replacements in Atlanta
                                                                             (RA)

                               11.3.2                                        https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24718
Execution Phase

As the project progresses and more information becomes available to the project team, the total risk on the project typically
reduces, as activities are performed without loss. The risk plan needs to be updated with new information and risks checked off that
are related to activities that have been performed.

Understanding where the risks occur on the project is important information for managing the contingency budget and managing
cash reserves. Most organizations develop a plan for financing the project from existing organizational resources, including
financing the project through a variety of financial instruments. In most cases, there is a cost to the organization to keep these funds
available to the project, including the contingency budget. As the risks decrease over the length of the project, if the contingency is
not used, then the funds set aside by the organization can be used for other purposes.

To determine the amount of contingency that can be released, the project team will conduct another risk evaluation and determine
the amount of risk remaining on the project. If the risk profile is lower, the project team may release contingency funds back to the
parent organization. If additional risks are uncovered, a new mitigation plan is developed including the possible addition of
contingency funds.

Closeout Phase

During the closeout phase, agreements for risk sharing and risk transfer need to be concluded and the risk breakdown structure
examined to be sure all the risk events have been avoided or mitigated. The final estimate of loss due to risk can be made and
recorded as part of the project documentation. If a Monte Carlo simulation was done, the result can be compared to the predicted
result.

 Risk Closeout on John's Move

To close out the risk mitigation plan for John's move, John examines the risk breakdown structure and risk mitigation plan for
items that need to be finalized. He makes a checklist to be sure all the risk mitigation plans are completed, as shown below.

Figure 11.6 Closeout of Risk Mitigation Plan for John's Move

Risk                           Mitigation                                Closeout

Items lost by movers           Mover's insurance plus digital image      Confirm all of the numbered boxes are
                               inventory                                 present and still sealed

Antique furniture damaged      Mover's insurance plus personal           Supervise unloading and unwrapping;
                               supervision of wrapping and loading       visually inspect each piece

House plants                   Ask Carlita to bring half of them in her  Confirm that the plants are healthy and
                               van when she visits                       that Carlita brought about half of them

Risk is not allocated evenly over the life of the project. On projects with a high degree of new technology, the majority of the risks
may be in the early phases of the project. On projects with a large equipment budget, the largest amount of risk may be during the
procurement of the equipment. On global projects with a large amount of political risk, the highest portion of risk may be toward
the end of the project.

Key Takeaways

    During the initiation phase, risks are identified that could threaten the viability of the project. Mitigation options are considered
    to see if they would be sufficient to protect the project.
    During the planning phase, risks are identified and analyzed for each activity group in a risk breakdown structure, and
    mitigation is planned for each risk
    During the execution phase, risks are checked off as activities are completed or mitigation is performed if loss does occur. New
    risks are identified and added to the plan.
    During the closeout phase, insurance contracts are cancelled and partnerships terminated. A summary of actual costs associated
    with risks are compared with initial estimates to refine estimating capabilities. The successes and failures of the risk

                                           11.3.3                                  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24718
    management plan are summarized and saved with the project documentation to add to the company's corporate knowledge.

Exercises

 1. High-risk events that require expensive mitigation options threaten the choice of the project during the _________ phase.
 2. A risk breakdown structure is developed during the _______ phase.
 3. Risk transfers and risk sharing arrangements are terminated during the ___________ phase.
 4. If you plan an outdoor wedding, what is a risk that would threaten the project in the initiation phase and a mitigation plan that

    would allow the project to proceed?
 5. In your own words, describe risk management during the planning phase.
 6. In your own words, describe risk management during the closeout phase?

Risk Assessment

Recall a project that you considered at one time but decided against during the initiation phase because the risks were too great or
the mitigation plan was insufficient to proceed. Describe the project, the risks, the mitigation plan, and why you chose not to go
forward.

This page titled 11.3: Project Risk by Phases is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

11.3.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24718
11.4: Project Risk and the Project Complexity Profile

  Learning Objectives

    1. Identify the relationship between project risk and external, internal, technical, and environmental complexity.

Risk seems to have a positive correlation to complexity. High-risk projects are in most cases highly complex. The process of
conducting a risk analysis focuses on understanding what can go wrong and the likelihood that it will go wrong. The project team
then develops a project mitigation plan that addresses the items that were identified as high risk. The complexity analysis explores
the project from the perspective of what elements on the project add to project complexity. The result of this analysis is the
information needed by the project leadership to develop an appropriate execution plan. This execution plan also contains the risk
management plan.

Although increased complexity on a project increases the project risk profile, risk is only one component of the complexity profile,
and the manageability of the risk is also reflected in the complexity level of the project. For example, the organizational component
of the project may be extremely complex with decision making shared among several independent clients. The project management
team will develop an execution plan that includes developing and maintaining alignment among the various clients. Although the
organizational risk of the project decreases with the development of the execution plan, the organizational approach of the client
did not change the complexity level of the project. If the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index (DPCI) is used to rate the project, high
ratings in each category carry their own types of increased risks.

External Complexity

Projects that have a high score in the external complexity category in the DPCI are larger and longer than usual for the project
management group and the project manager and the available resources are lacking. Due to lack of experience on this size project,
unknown risks are significant. The inadequacy of resources will cause risks that are more predictable.

Internal Complexity

Projects with high scores for internal complexity have risks to the budget, schedule, and quality due to organizational complexity
and changes of scope due to lack of clarity in project and scope statements.

Technological Complexity

High scores in technological complexity are associated with high levels of risk due to unknown flaws in the technology and lack of
familiarity with it. These problems result in risks to the schedule, budget, and quality.

Environmental Complexity

Environmental complexity includes legal, cultural, political, and ecological factors. High scores for complexity in this category
imply high risks for delay and expensive resolution to lawsuits, public opposition, changes for political considerations, and
unforeseen ecological impacts.

Key Takeaways
    There is a positive correlation between the complexity of a project and the risk. Increased levels of complexity imply more
    people, newer technologies, and increased internal and external unknown factors.
    High scores for external complexity imply high risks to the schedule, budget, and quality due to unknown factors and limited
    resources.
    High scores for internal complexity imply high risks to the budget, schedule, and quality due to organizational complexity and
    changes of scope due to lack of clarity in project and scope statements.
    High scores for technological complexity imply high risks to the budget, schedule, and quality due to unknown flaws in the
    technology and lack of familiarity with it.
    Environmental complexity includes legal, cultural, political, and ecological issues. High scores for complexity in this category
    imply high risks for delay and expensive resolution to lawsuits, public opposition, changes for political considerations, and
    unforeseen ecological impacts.

11.4.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24719
Exercises

 1. There seems to be a ______ correlation between project complexity and risk.
 2. One complexity category that is likely to have high risks due to unknown causes is _______, due to lack of experience with the

    size of project.
 3. How does a high degree of complexity in a project's environment affect the level of risk?

Environmental Risks

Identify a project with which you are familiar or one that has been in the news recently where the external environmental
complexity caused increased costs or delays. Describe the impact of the risk, and the mitigation and its effectiveness. If the
mitigation was ineffective, describe how you might have prepared a different mitigation plan.

This page titled 11.4: Project Risk and the Project Complexity Profile is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

11.4.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24719
11.5: Exercises

Exercises at the end of the chapter are designed to strengthen your understanding and retention of the information recently acquired
in the chapter.

Essay Questions

Write several paragraphs to provide more in-depth analysis and consideration when answering the following questions.

 1. Choose a simple project with which you are familiar and describe a risk that is typical of each phase of the project and a
    mitigation plan for those four risks.

 2. Assume that you are considering the purchase of a house. What are examples of each of the four types of risk mitigation that are
    associated with buying a house? Explain your choice of each example and relate it to the definition of each type of risk
    mitigation.

 3. Assume that you are working on a complex project to add a wing to a hospital that is next to a natural wetland. Using the four
    categories of the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index, identify a high-impact risk and explain your choice.

Discussion

The exercises in this section are designed to promote exchange of information among students in the classroom or in an online
discussion. The exercises are more open ended, which means that what you find might be completely different from what your
classmates find, and you can all benefit by sharing what you have learned.

 1. Choose a situation with which you are familiar where a risk event occurred that had a high impact on a project causing it to
    exceed the contingency allowances in the schedule or budget. Do you think this event was an unknown or known risk? What
    additional mitigation efforts (if any) should be used on a similar project in the future? Consider situations described by your
    classmates and contribute ideas for mitigation of events in their projects.

 2. Consider your personal health. What are two examples of known risks and a mitigation plan for those two risks? Describe your
    mitigation plan for unknown risks. Consider the risks and plans described by your classmates and make suggestions for other
    mitigation options.

This page titled 11.5: Exercises is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

11.5.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24720
11.6: Web Exercise

  Learning Objectives
    1. Describe the benefits of estimating risk using a Monte Carlo simulation.

Monte Carlo Risk Simulations

Planning for risks is a form of betting on the future. An accomplished gambler knows the odds of drawing a certain combination of
cards in a poker hand or of a ball landing on a number at a roulette wheel. If a project has several risk factors, they are not likely to
all occur on the same project, but it is important to know the odds of that happening and to compare them to the potential profit of
the project. If several risks do materialize on the same project, it might cause the company to lose money on the project, and senior
management must decide if the benefit is worth the risk.
Computers can generate random numbers that can be used to simulate the likelihood of combinations of risk factors occurring and
the impact on the project's profitability. These simulations calculate odds like those a gambler would use before placing a bet, and
the process is named after a famous gambling center in Europe.
To use a Monte Carlo simulation, you have to decide how the frequency of occurrences is distributed. Three types of distributions
are most common: normal, skewed, and equal. If they are governed by the central limits principle, the occurrences will have a
normal distribution.

                                                                     Figure 11.7 Normal Distribution
If the likely frequency of occurrences of a risk factor is more likely to be distributed to either side of the middle of the range, it is a
skewed distribution.

11.6.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24721
                                                                     Figure 11.8 Skewed Distribution

If the likelihood of occurrence is evenly distributed across the range where each possibility has the same odds of occurring, it is an
equal distribution.

                                                                      Figure 11.9 Equal Distribution
A computer can choose numbers for each risk factor that represent a possible outcome for that risk on the project according to its
distribution. Those numbers are fed into a spreadsheet that determines the effect on the project and its costs. This process is
repeated thousands of times, and the result of each iteration--repeated process--is stored in a table of possible outcomes. This
table is summarized in a histogram that shows how many of the iterations produced profit (or loss) in each range (bin).

The outcome of a Monte Carlo simulation gives managers an idea of how much the project could make or lose and the odds of that
happening. Monte Carlo simulations are often used to predict the likelihood of a new product making a profit or loss. The same
methods can be applied to predicting the profit or loss on a project.

Learn More about Monte Carlo Simulations

Complete the exercise by following these instructions:

 1. Open a blank document in a word processing program and then save the document as Ch11MonteCarloStudentName.doc. Leave
    the document open.

 2. Start a web browser and then to go to A Practical Guide to Monte Carlo Simulations at
    http://www.vertex42.com/ExcelArticles/mc/MonteCarloSimulation.html.

 3. Read the first screen to review the concepts.
 4. Near the bottom of the first screen, click the arrow labeled Sales Forecast Example, as shown in Figure 11.10 "Next Page

    Button".

                                                                        Figure 11.10 Next Page Button

11.6.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24721
   Source: Courtesy of www.vertex42.com.
5. Scroll down past the advertisements and begin reading at Step 1. Capture a screen that shows Step 1 and paste it into

   Ch11MonteCarloStudentName.doc.
6. Read the explanation of how to create a model.
7. Use the Next button at the bottom of the screen to go to step 2, Generating Random Inputs.
8. Read steps 2, 3, and 4 on this screen.
9. Continue reading and advancing screens until you get to the histogram as shown in Figure 11.11 "Estimated Loss or Profit".

                                                                    Figure 11.11 Estimated Loss or Profit

    Source: Adapted from Wittwer, J.W., "Creating a Histogram In Excel" from www.vertex42.com, June 1, 2004,
    http://vertex42.com/ExcelArticles/mc/Histogram.html.

10. The green line is the cumulative probability. The red lines are intended to help you find the 5 percent and 95 percent probability
    points on the green line.

11. Capture this screen and paste it into Ch11MonteCarloStudentName.doc.
12. Refer to Figure 11.11 "Estimated Loss or Profit". Notice a spot on the green line is circled. According to the horizontal scale,

    this is the spot on the cumulative percentage line that marks the difference between negative and positive income for the
    project. In the word processing document, below the last screen capture, describe how you would use this chart to predict the
    percentage chance that this project will lose money. Leave the document open.

Learn about Using Dedicated Monte Carlo Simulation Software

Complete the exercise by following these instructions:

 1. Use your web browser to go to Monte Carlo Simulation Tutorial at http://www.solver.com/simulation/monte-carlo-
    simulation/tutorial.htm.

 2. Read each of the first seven screens. Capture screens where indicated in the following list and paste them into
    Ch11MonteCarloStudentName.doc:

        Introduction (Capture the section titled The Flawed Average Model.)
        Introducing Uncertainty
        Introducing Uncertainty (cont.)
        Uncertain Functions and Statistics
        Using Interactive Simulation (Capture the table near the bottom.)
        Viewing the Full Range of Profit Outcomes
        Focusing on Profitable Outcomes (Capture the simulation results histogram at the bottom of the screen.)

 3. The authors make the case that a simple average of the risks produces an estimate that is too high. If they run a thousand
    combinations of risk outcomes, they predict a lower profit and a certain likelihood of losing money. In the word processing
    document, below the last screen capture, review the screens and answer the following questions:

        What does a simple average model predict for a net profit?
        What does the simulation predict is the "True Average" profit?
        If most of the risk factors occur, how much money could the project lose?

11.6.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24721
Analysis

 1. At the bottom of Ch11MonteCarloStudentName.doc, write between one hundred and two hundred words to describe the
    benefits of estimating risk using a Monte Carlo simulation versus a simple average of the risks. Use specific references to the
    assigned reading in the text and in the web pages in the previous two parts of this exercise.

 2. Review your work and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

Element                        Best                              Adequate      Poor

File name                      Ch11MonteCarloStudentName .doc .docx version    Student name not included

Describe the benefits of       Two screen captures plus a        Same as Best  Missing screens; inaccurate
estimating risk using a Monte  description of how the chart is                 estimates; incorrect answers to
Carlo simulation               used to estimate the percentage                 the three questions; description
                               chance of losing money; three                   without specific references
                               screen captures and answers to
                               the three questions; description
                               of the benefits of a Monte
                               Carlo simulation

 3. Save the file and submit it as directed by the instructor.

This page titled 11.6: Web Exercise is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                     11.6.4                                    https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24721
CHAPTER OVERVIEW

12: Project Procurement and Closure

  12.1: Identifying the Need for Resources Outside the Organization
  12.2: Procurement Plan
  12.3: Selecting the Type of Contract
  12.4: Procurement Process
  12.5: Project Closure
  12.6: Exercises
  12.7: Web Exercises
This page titled 12: Project Procurement and Closure is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                                                                              1
12.1: Identifying the Need for Resources Outside the Organization

  Learning Objectives

    1. Identify the factors that are considered when deciding whether to buy goods from within the organization or to obtain them
       from outsiders.

    2. Identify what factors are considered when deciding to outsource or perform the work within the organization.

The project team decides the work that will be self-performed--performed by members of the project team--and the work that will
be outsourced to others. The procurement strategy focuses on the work that will be outsourced--performed by outsiders.

Luu, Ng, and Chen (Luu, Ng, & Chen, 2003) studied project procurement selection priorities and identified budget and schedule as
the most important considerations in the decision to outsource activities. This study of construction projects also identified other
items that project managers must consider in developing a procurement strategy, including quality, risk, complexity, and flexibility.
Some outsourcing decisions are easy.

  Outsourcing Steel and Concrete in New York

  A construction company has a contract to build a large building in downtown New York. Most, if not all, the construction
  materials, such as steel and concrete, will be purchased from companies that specialize in steel and concrete. Existing
  companies that produce and sell steel can provide the steel the project needs at a much lower cost and faster than if the project
  manager's organization attempted to build the capacity itself.

Some outsourcing decisions--sometimes called make or buy decisions--are more difficult. On the same building construction
project, new construction materials and methods are required that will make the building more energy efficient. The project
manager can outsource this portion of the project to companies that have this expertise or develop this expertise on the project and
self-perform the work. The costs of developing this expertise within the project will be more expensive and may take more time
than outsourcing this work.

Self-performing this work also has benefits. The project team would develop this expertise and the additional expertise would add
value to the parent company and save money on future projects. The project management team would have greater control over the
work because the work would be performed by members of the project team instead of outsiders. Self-performing and outsourcing
the work have both benefits and risks.

This decision is primarily influenced by the following:

    Cost (budget)
    Schedule

The following factors also influence outsourcing decisions:

    Risk
    Quality
    Flexibility

  Outsourcing Versus Self-Performing

  On the New York building construction project, the project manager decided to outsource the portion of the work that required
  new methods and materials. The project team assigned engineers from the project team to evaluate the work during the project
  and to assess the appropriate methods and costs for the parent company to develop this capacity within the company. The
  additional costs of developing the capacity and the additional risks of implementing a new method with existing resources
  outweighed the benefits of developing the capacity within the organization.

The project procurement strategy begins with these self-perform or buy decisions.

12.1.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24722
  New York Construction Project

  On the New York building construction project, the basic engineering and construction activities are core expertise of the
  parent company, and the project team had access to the qualified resources to perform the work. The decision to self-perform
  this portion of the work was easy because the company had a cost and schedule advantage by using the existing resources. The
  purchase of the steel, concrete, and other commodities was also easy because the costs of developing those resources far
  outweighed the benefit of purchasing them.

Some of the procurement decisions are not so obvious and the project team evaluates the cost, schedule, quality, flexibility, and risk
implication of self-performing versus outsourcing the work.

Key Takeaways
    The factors that influence procurement are primarily cost and schedule but also include risk, quality, and flexibility.
    To determine whether to outsource or do the work within the organization, consider which option is less costly and which
    option can deliver the work on time.

Exercises

 1. The primary factors that influence procurement are cost and ____________.
 2. In addition to the two primary factors that influence procurement, what are three other important factors?
 3. What is one advantage of doing the work within the organization instead of outsourcing it?

Internalize your learning experience by preparing to discuss the following.

    Choose a situation with which you are familiar where you or your organization chose to hire someone outside your organization
    instead of developing the skill yourselves. What factors were most important in making the choice and how do they relate to the
    factors described in this section?

References

Luu, D. T., S. Thomas Ng, and Swee Eng Chen, "Parameters Governing the Selection of Procurement System," Journal of
Engineering, Construction, and Architectural Management 10, no. 3 (2003): 209-18.

This page titled 12.1: Identifying the Need for Resources Outside the Organization is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored,
remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

12.1.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24722
12.2: Procurement Plan

  Learning Objectives

    1. Describe the role of suppliers.
    2. Describe the role of vendors.
    3. Describe the role of partners.

After the outsourcing versus self-performing decisions are made, the procurement team develops the purchasing plan.

The method of purchasing products or services depends on the uniqueness and importance of the product or service. One way to
organize the procurement plan is by the type of relationship with the providers of the outsourced goods or services.

Suppliers

Some of the goods or services are commonly available with little variation in quality or availability. Such goods and services are
called commodities. The providers of commodities are suppliers and there are usually several from which to choose. Purchasing
commodities from suppliers focuses on achieving the lowest cost. Cost of commodities can often be found in the supplier's catalog.
On smaller, less complex projects, supplies can be purchased as needed from the supplier's catalog.

Additional cost savings are often available if large quantities of a commodity are purchased from the same supplier. On larger,
more complex projects, a list of materials and supplies is developed from the project cost estimate. This list is provided to suppliers
as a request for quote (RFQ), and the suppliers respond with their lowest price. To avoid choosing a bid from a company that will
make a promise it cannot keep, many organizations will maintain a list of suppliers that meet the organization's requirements.
These requirements usually include the proven ability to meet the quality and schedule specifications.

The project management team develops a procedure for requesting a quote. On smaller projects, the parent purchasing organization
may process all RFQs. On larger projects, a procurement organization is established with expertise in purchasing. The purchasing
team will develop a list of all procurement requirements for the project and develop a procurement schedule that assures the
materials will be available to the project when needed.

The project team develops an RFQ based on the quantity and schedule needs of the project and sends the RFQ to the identified
qualified suppliers. The suppliers then develop a quote that lists the specific materials to be provided, the price for each, and a
schedule for delivery. The project team evaluates each quote from suppliers and determines that the supplier bid meets all the
requirements, and in most cases, the supplier with the lowest price will be awarded the bid.

  RFQ for Housing Contractor

  A housing contractor who is building ten identical houses develops a materials list that includes all the carpentry, plumbing,
  and electrical supplies needed to build all ten houses. The housing contractor develops an RFQ for all these materials,
  including the construction schedule, and submits the RFQ to the four largest building supply companies in the region. Each of
  the supply companies decides to bid on the project and provides a bid for the materials in the RFQ. One of the bidders has the
  lowest price but is unable to deliver the materials to the job site. The project team calculates the cost of transporting the
  materials to the job site. After the cost of transportation is added to the bid, it is no longer the lowest total cost. The bidder with
  the total lowest total cost is awarded the contract.

Some organizations that do a large number of projects will develop a relationship with one or two suppliers based on developing
cost savings for both organizations. This relationship is commonly called a key supplier relationship.

  Key Supplier for Housing Supplies

  The housing contractor develops a key supplier relationship with one or two of the building supply companies. The building
  supply company would guarantee a 10 percent discount on all materials and the contractor would promise to purchase
  exclusively from the key supplier. Both organizations save the cost and time associated with preparing the bid. The building

12.2.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24723
  supply company plans on a consistent volume of business from the contractor and the contractor can expect priority treatment
  when supplies are scarce.

Vendors

Vendors often provide a unique product or service that cannot be readily purchased in the marketplace. The vendor typically
provides a product or service that is designed for the project. The following are examples of products or services provided by
vendors:

    A large military contract to design and build a new fighter aircraft
    A new software program design to improve the efficiency of a hospital emergency room
    The design and construction of a blast furnace for a new steel mill

Products and services from vendors need input and insight from the vendor. Instead of issuing a request for quote (RFQ) for a list
of commodities, the project team issues a request for proposal (RFP). Companies responding to an RFP are invited to provide
creative approaches to adding value to the project. Bidders are encouraged to offer design alternatives, alternative uses of materials,
and scheduling alternatives that meet all the project requirements and also reduce the total project cost. The bids are evaluated on
the total value to the project, including the contribution to the project goals.

  RFP for Mining Operation

  A copper mining project in Argentina included the design and construction of the mine site, the extraction of copper from the
  raw materials, the building of a pipeline to transport the copper ore to the Atlantic coast, and the construction of a port to
  enable the loading of the copper ore into various size ships. The construction materials, such as lumber, steel, and concrete,
  were purchased through suppliers, including key suppliers.

    Because vendor performance is critical to the success of the project, the management of the vendor relationship is a project
    management priority. Project management will often implement processes that encourage the vendors to submit suggestions
    that will reduce total project cost, shorten the schedule, or improve the performance. The project management team will often
    assign someone from the team to monitor the relationship and provide support from project resources to help assure vendor
    success.

   Partners

    If the parent organization lacks key skills or relationships, it might work with other organizations as partners--especially on
    international projects.

      Partnership on Mining Project

       In the Argentina mining project example, the United States parent organization had project management, engineering,
       procurement, construction, and mining technology expertise. The company also had relationships with major mining
       equipment vendors. The U.S. construction company partnered with an Argentinean company that had expertise and
       relationships important to the success of the project.

    A partnership is a formal arrangement to execute the project with each party contributing resources. In most partnerships, both
    parties benefit from the success of the project and share the costs associated with a less successful project. Critical to the
    success of a partnership is the clear definition of roles and responsibilities on the project, a common understanding of the
    project goals, and a scope of work for each partner.

    Building the relationship between major partners on the project is similar to building relationships with clients. On a large,
    complex project, a partnership alignment session is often required to build the trust required for open communication channels.
    Maintaining the relationship permits more effective problem solving and coordinated action on the project. A well-managed
    partnering relationship can contribute to the achievement of project goals, reduce overall costs, and shorten the project
    schedule. In most cases, the parent organization is aware of weaknesses in the project resources or skills and searches for a
    potential partner that has the needed resources or skills. In our Argentinean example, the parent company knew that construction

12.2.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24723
    experience in Argentina would be important to a successful project. Both companies will research the capability of the other
    company to assure that the partnership is appropriate for both companies.

      Biotech Plant Partnership in Puerto Rico

       On a project to build a new biotech plant in Puerto Rico, a large engineering and construction company selected a Puerto
       Rican civil engineering company to design the site work on the project. Because the plant was needed quickly, the project
       schedule was an important component of every discussion and meeting the project end date was a major goal. The Puerto
       Rican Company was asked to begin developing the civil drawings early, before much of the needed information had been
       developed. This was a situation where a partnering relationship would benefit the project. Both companies would mutually
       support each other to achieve project goals and both would benefit from project success.

           In this situation, the project procurement plan specified the development of a subcontract for the civil engineering, and a
           contract was developed with a clear scope of work and a cost based on completing the work in the contract on time and
           according to specification. Because the aggressive project schedule required the civil engineering company to begin
           work before all the needed information was available, change orders were required when new information became
           available. The contract allowed several days to evaluate the impact of the change on cost and schedule, and the time
           evaluation process began to cause delays in the project.

    Eventually, a new contract was developed to make the Puerto Rican company a partner. These new partnering arrangements
    allowed the engineers to get early information and contribute ideas that would shorten the schedule. This case is an example of
    the need to evaluate the project goals and environment and develop a procurement strategy that matches the conditions of the
    project.

    Key Takeaways
        Commodities are purchased through suppliers using a request for quote (RFQ) and selected on the basis of price. An
        exception is the key supplier relationship where the supplier-organization relationship is long term and the supplier passes
        along some of the savings of avoiding the bidding process.
        Vendors provide products and services that are designed for the project based on a request for proposal (RFP) that invites the
        vendors to meet the goals of the request using their products and skills.
        If the organization lacks key skills or relationships, it might form a partnership arrangement with another company to share
        the benefits and risks of the project.

   Exercises

     1. Commodities are described in an ______ (three-letter acronym).
     2. The objectives of the work are described in an _____________ (three-letter acronym), and the details of how to accomplish

        those objectives is proposed by the vendor.
     3. If a project takes place in a different country, the project team might seek a _________ with a local company to provide

        local contacts and expertise in local issues.
     4. What is different about a key supplier relationship?
     5. What is the difference between an RFP and an RFQ?
     6. How is a partnership different from a vendor relationship?

    Internalize your learning experience by preparing to discuss the following.

        If you were building your own house, what would be an example of something that would be procured using an RFQ and
        something that would be procured with an RFP? Describe how your choices meet the descriptions of products or services
        procured from suppliers or vendors.

This page titled 12.2: Procurement Plan is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

12.2.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24723
12.3: Selecting the Type of Contract

  Learning Objectives

    1. Identify factors that determine which type of contract to select.
    2. Describe the types of fixed cost contracts.
    3. Describe the types of cost reimbursable contracts.

An agreement between the organization and an outside provider of a service or materials is a legal contract. To limit
misunderstandings and make them more enforceable, contracts are usually written documents that describe the obligations of both
parties.

Because legal agreements often create risk for the parent organization, procurement activities are often guided by the policies and
procedures of the parent organization. After the project management team develops an understanding of what portions of the
project work will be outsourced and defines the type of relationships that are needed to support the project execution plan, the
procurement team begins to develop the contracting plan. On smaller, less complex projects, the contract development and
execution is typically managed through the parent company or by a part-time person assigned to the project. On larger, more
complex projects, the procurement team can consist of work teams within the procurement function with special expertise in
contracting. The contract plan defines the relationship between the project and the subcontractors (supplier, vendor, or partner) and
also defines a process for making changes in the agreement to accommodate changes that will occur on the project. This change
management process is similar to the change management process used with the project agreement with the project client.

The contracting plan of the project supports the procurement approach of the project. The following are some factors to consider
when selecting the type of contract:

    The uncertainty of the scope of work needed
    The party assuming the risk of unexpected cost increases
    The importance of meeting the scheduled milestone dates
    The need for predictable project costs

There are several types of contracting approaches and each supports different project environments and project approaches. The
legal contracts that support the procurement plan consist of two general types of contract: the fixed price and the cost reimbursable
contracts, with variations on each main type.

Fixed Price Contracts

The fixed price contract is a legal agreement between the project organization and an entity (person or company) to provide goods
or services to the project at an agreed-on price. The contract usually details the quality of the goods or services, the timing needed
to support the project, and the price for delivering goods or services. There are several variations of the fixed price contract. For
commodities and goods and services where the scope of work is very clear and not likely to change, the fixed price contract offers a
predictable cost. The responsibility for managing the work to meet the needs of the project is focused on the contractor. The project
team tracks the quality and schedule progress to assure the contractors will meet the project needs. The risks associated with fixed
price contracts are the costs associated with project change. If a change occurs on the project that requires a change order from the
contractor, the price of the change is typically very high. Even when the price for changes is included in the original contract,
changes on a fixed price contract will create higher total project costs than other forms of contracts because the majority of the cost
risk is transferred to the contractor, and most contractors will add a contingency to the contract to cover their additional risk.

Fixed price contracts require the availability of at least two or more suppliers that have the qualifications and performance histories
that assure the needs of the project can be met. The other requirement is a scope of work that is most likely not going to change.
Developing a clear scope of work based on good information, creating a list of highly qualified bidders, and developing a clear
contract that reflects that scope of work are critical aspects of a good fixed priced contract.

12.3.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24724
Fixed Total Cost Contract

If the service provider is responsible for incorporating all costs, including profit, into the agreed-on price, it is a fixed total cost
contract. The contractor assumes the risks for unexpected increases in labor and materials that are needed to provide the service or
materials and in the quantity of time and materials needed.

Fixed Price with Price Adjustment

The fixed price contract with price adjustment is used for unusually long projects that span years. The most common use of this
type of contract is the inflation-adjusted price. In some countries, the value of its local currency can vary greatly in a few months,
which affects the cost of local materials and labor. In periods of high inflation, the client assumes risk of higher costs due to
inflation, and the contract price is adjusted based on an inflation index. The volatility of certain commodities can also be accounted
for in a price adjustment contract. For example, if the price of oil significantly affects the costs of the project, the client can accept
the oil price volatility risk and include a provision in the contract that would allow the contract price adjustment based on a change
in the price of oil.

Fixed Price with Incentive Fee Contract

Fixed price with incentive fee is a contract type that provides an incentive for performing on the project above the established
baseline in the contract. The contract might include an incentive for completing the work on an important milestone for the project.
Often contracts have a penalty clause if the work is not performed according to the contract. For example, if the new software is not
completed in time to support the start-up of a new plant, the contract might penalize the software company a daily amount of
money for every day the software is late. This type of penalty is often used when the software is critical to the project and the delay
will cost the project significant money.

  Incentive Fee on Copper Mine Project

  A project in South America to design and construct a copper mine would supply copper to several companies throughout the
  world. The copper that would be produced by the mine was sold before the mine was complete and ships were scheduled to
  make the delivery dates to processing plants.

Any delay in the project would mean a delay in shipping and significant loss to the mine, the shipping company, and the plants that
were expecting the copper. Including an incentive fee for completing the project on time and including the important subcontracts
increased the likelihood that the mine would make copper deliveries on time.

Fixed Unit Price

If the service or materials can be measured in standard units, but the amount needed is not known accurately, the price per unit can
be fixed--a fixed unit price contract. The project team assumes the responsibility of estimating the number of units used. If the
estimate is not accurate, the contract does not need to be changed, but the project will exceed the budgeted cost.

  Fixed Unit Price Contract for Concrete

  An example of a fixed price contract is a contract for the concrete needed for the foundation of a building. The project
  contracted for the concrete company to supply 1,000 cubic yards (CY) at 5,000 PSI (hardness standard) of concrete at the
  project site according to, and in support of, the project schedule for $70 per square yard. This is an example of a unit price
  contract. If the project only uses 970 CY, then the total costs will be lower. If the project uses 1,050 CY, then the costs will be
  higher.

An alternative pricing would be to establish a fixed price of $70,000 (1,000 CY  $70.00). Both the unit price approach and the
total costs approach are fixed price contracts.

Figure 12.7 Table of Fixed Price Contracts and Characteristics

12.3.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24724
Type                  Known Scope  Share of Risk   Incentive for Meeting  Predictability of Cost
                      Very High    All Contractor  Milestones             Very High
Fixed Total Cost      High         Mostly Project  Low>                   High
Fixed Unit Price      High         Mostly Project  Low                    Medium-high

Fixed price with      High         Mostly Project  High                   Medium
Incentive Fee
Fixed Fee with Price                               Low
Adjustment

Cost Reimbursable Contracts

In a cost reimbursable contract, the organization agrees to pay the contractor for the cost of performing the service or providing the
goods. Cost reimbursable contracts are also known as cost plus contracts. Cost reimbursable contracts are most often used when the
scope of work or the costs for performing the work are not well known. The project uses a cost reimbursable contract to pay the
contractor for allowable expenses related to performing the work. Since the cost of the project is reimbursable, the contractor has
much less risk associated with cost increases. When the costs of the work are not well known, a cost reimbursable contract reduces
the amount of money the bidders place in the bid to account for the risk associated with potential increases in costs.

The contractor is also less motivated to find ways to reduce the cost of the project unless there are incentives for supporting the
accomplishment of project goals. Cost reimbursable contracts also require good documentation of the costs that occurred on the
project to assure that the contractor gets paid for all the work performed and to assure that the organization is not paying for
something that was not completed.

  Cost Reimbursable Contract to Drill Wells

  A project to build a new plant in an area that did not have sufficient water included the drilling of water wells to produce
  several thousand gallons of water a day for the new plant. Although geological surveys indicated there was sufficient water to
  meet the plant's requirements, the number of wells needed was unknown. The project developed a cost reimbursable contract
  that paid the well drilling contractor for allowable costs associated with drilling the wells.

The contractor is paid an additional amount above the costs. There are several ways to compensate the contractor.

Cost Reimbursable Contract with Fixed Fee

A cost reimbursable contract with a fixed fee provides the contractor with a fee or profit amount that is determined at the
beginning of the contract and does not change.

  Fixed Fee for Providing Water

  On the new water plant project, the project accountant reviewed each bill, including time cards for labor, invoices for
  materials, and other documents that supported the invoice. The contractor was then reimbursed for the allowable costs plus
  the administrative fee and a fixed amount for his profit.

Cost Reimbursable Contract with Percentage Fee

A cost reimbursable contract with a percentage fee pays the contractor for costs plus a percentage of the costs, such as 5 percent
of total allowable costs. The contractor is reimbursed for allowable costs and is paid a fee.

  Percentage Fee to Evaluate Dam in West Virginia

  A small community in West Virginia was worried about the structural integrity of a dam above the town. The county
  council was worried the dam would break and cause loss of life and property. They contracted with a civil engineering firm

                                   12.3.3                                 https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24724
  to evaluate the dam structure and attest to the structural soundness. The firm hired an expert from outside the area and paid
  the expert $1,000.00 per day plus expenses such as meals, travel, and lodging. The civil engineering firm billed the
  community for the expert's fees and expenses plus 10 percent of the total.

Cost Reimbursable Contract with an Incentive Fee

A is used to encourage performance in areas critical to the project. Often the contract attempts to motivate contractors to save or
reduce project costs. The use of the cost reimbursable contract with an incentive fee is one way to motivate cost reduction
behaviors.

  Incentive Fee for Road Project

  A road construction company won a contract to build a small road to the new county courthouse. The estimate to complete
  the road was $10 million. The contract received a cost reimbursable contract that would pay all costs plus a 3 percent fee.
  The contactor could also earn an incentive by performing the work for less than $10 million. The contract might include a
  fee that would pay the contract 20 percent of all savings below the estimated $10 million. In this case, the county got the
  road at a lower cost, and the contractor made more money.

The contract could have focused on schedule and paid a bonus for completing ahead of schedule. This type of contract requires
that the project management team has the capability to assure the quality of work performed meets project specifications and
the savings was not generated through reducing the quality of the work.

Cost plus Contract with Award Fee

A cost plus contract with award fee reimburses the contractor for all allowable costs plus a fee that is based on performance
criteria. The fee is typically based on goals or objectives that are more subjective. An amount of money is set aside for the
contractor to earn through excellent performance, and the decision on how much to pay the contractor is left to the judgment of
the project team. The amount is sufficient to motivate excellent performance.

The following Reuters story is about the use of an award fee to incentivize the contractor's performance in maintaining the
ship's performance during transfer to other owners.

VSE Corporation (NASDAQ GS: VSEC) reported today that it has been awarded a $249 million cost-plus award fee contract
option modification by the Naval Sea Systems Command that can be exercised by the Navy to provide one additional year of
continued support to NAVSEA PMS 326 and 333 for ex-U.S. Navy ships that are sold, leased or otherwise transferred through
the Foreign Military Sales (FMS) program to FMS clients.
This contract provides for services supporting U.S. ships that are sold, leased or otherwise transferred to FMS clients by
providing engineering, technical, procurement, logistics, test, inspection, calibration, repair, maintenance and overhaul support
services, including reactivation and modernization.
Since 1995, VSE's International Group, GLOBAL Division (formerly BAV Division) has transferred 42 ships to foreign
governments. VSE is currently reactivating EX-USNS Andrew J. Higgins (TAO-190) for transfer to Chile. Additionally, VSE
actively supports various countries through the follow-on technical support requirements of the contract, providing training,
maintenance, repair, and in-country infrastructure improvement assistance in support of transferred ships. Countries currently
supported by VSE include Bahrain, Egypt, Japan, Mexico, Taiwan, Turkey, Poland, Philippines, Italy and Romania.
"We are extremely pleased to have won this award. It is a testament to the confidence and trust we have earned from the U.S.
Navy and their foreign clients for the past 14 years," said VSE CEO/COO/President Maurice "Mo" Gauthier. "We look forward
to continuing to deliver excellence and innovative technology solutions to the world's navies for years to come" (VSE
Corporation, 2009).

Time and Materials Contracts

On small activities that have a high uncertainty, the contractor might charge an hourly rate for labor, plus the cost of materials,
plus a percentage of the total costs. This type of contract is called time and materials (T&M). Time is usually contracted on an
hourly rate basis and the contractor usually submits time sheets and receipts for items purchased on the project. The project

12.3.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24724
reimburses the contractor for the time spent based on an agreed-on rate and the actual cost of the materials. The fee is typically
a percent of the total cost.

Time and materials contracts are used on projects for work that is smaller in scope and has uncertainty or risk, and the project
rather than the contractor assumes the risk. Since the contractor will most likely include contingency in the price of other types
of contracts to cover the high risk, T&M contracts provide lower total cost to the project.

Figure 12.9 Table of Contract Types and Characteristics

Cost Reimbursable (CR) Known Scope  Share of Risk   Incentive for Meeting  Predictability of Cost
                                                    Milestones

CR with Fixed Fee       Medium      Mostly Project  Low                    Medium-high
CR with Percentage Fee  Medium      Mostly Project  Low>                   Medium-high
CR with Incentive Fee   Medium      Mostly Project  High                   Medium
CR with Award Fee       Medium      Mostly Project  High                   Medium

Time and Materials      Low         All Project     Low                    Low

To minimize the risk to the project, the contract typically includes a not-to-exceed amount, which means the contract can only
charge up to the agree amount. The T&M contract allows the project to make adjustments as more information is available. The
final cost of the work is not known until sufficient information is available to complete a more accurate estimate.

  Archeological Site Evaluation

  On a road construction project, the survey team discovers an archeological site. Contractors are required to preserve
  archeological sites and the project team explores ways to advance the schedule while a decision is made on how to handle
  the site. The project issues a T&M contract to an archeologist to determine the nature of the site and develop a plan to
  preserve the integrity of the site. A T&M contract is awarded because the size and character of the site is unknown and the
  amount of time and the type of equipment needed to explore the site is also unknown.

An archeologist from the local university was issued a T&M contract to cover the labor and expenses to explore the site and
develop a plan. An hourly rate was established for each member of the five-person archeological team. Equipment rental fees
plus 15 percent was paid on all equipment rented and supplies used. The archeological team's profit was incorporated into the
labor rates. A not-to-exceed amount was also included in the contract to capture the team's estimate of the amount of work. A
contract change order would increase the not-to-exceed number when more information was available.

Progress Payments and Change Management

Vendors and suppliers usually require payments during the life of the contract. On contracts that last several months, the
contractor will incur significant cost and will want the project to pay for these costs as early as possible. Rather than wait until
the end of the contract, a schedule of payments is typically developed as part of the contract and is connected to the completion
of a defined amount of work or project milestones. These payments made before the end of the project and based on the
progress of the work are called progress payments. For example, a concrete supplier on a construction project may bill the
contract for the amount of concrete poured the previous month plus the profit earned during that period. On a training project,
the contract might develop a payment schedule that pays for the development of the curriculum, and payment is made when the
curriculum is completed and accepted. In each case, there is a defined amount of work to be accomplished, a time frame for
accomplishing that work, and a quality standard the work must achieve before the contractor is paid for the work.

Just as the project has a scope of work that defines what is included in the project and what work is outside the project, vendors
and suppliers have a scope of work that defines what they will produce or supply to the company. (Partners typically share the
project scope of work and may not have a separate scope of work.) Often changes occur on the project that require changes in
the contractor's scope of work. How these changes will be managed during the life of the project is typically documented in the

                                    12.3.5                https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24724
contract. Capturing these changes early, documenting what changed and how the change impacted the contract, and developing
a change order (a change to the contract) are important to maintaining the progress of the project. Conflict among team
members will often arise when changes are not documented or when the team cannot agree on the change. Developing and
implementing an effective change management process for contractors and key suppliers will minimize this conflict and the
potential negative effect on the project.

Key Takeaways
    Contract selection is based on uncertainty of scope, assignment of risk, need for predictable costs, and the importance of
    meeting milestone dates.
    Total fixed cost is a single price where the scope is well defined. A fixed price with incentive contract offers a reward for
    finishing early or under budget or a penalty for being late. A fixed price with adjustment allows for increases in cost of
    materials or changes in currency values. A fixed unit price contract sets a price per unit, but the exact number of units is not
    known.
    In a cost reimbursable contract, the project pays for costs. A cost plus fixed fee contract assures the contractor of a known
    fee. A cost plus percentage fee calculates the fee as a percentage of the costs. A cost plus incentive fee sets goals for the
    contractor to achieve that would result in a bonus. A cost plus award fee is similar, but the goals are more subjective. Time
    and materials contracts pay for costs plus an hourly rate for the contractor's time.

Exercises

 1. A key factor in choosing the type of contract is the uncertainty of the ______, risk, cost, or schedule of the activity.
 2. A contract with an _____________ fee might reward the contractor for finishing early.
 3. Contracts that pay the contractor's costs are ____________ contracts.
 4. Which type of contract is most appropriate to use if the scope is extremely well known, and which type is most appropriate

    if the scope is very uncertain? Explain your choices.
 5. Why would a water well drilling company prefer a cost reimbursable contract versus a fixed cost contract?

Internalize your learning experience by preparing to discuss the following.

If you were a contractor, which type of contract would you prefer most and which would you like least? Explain your choices.
Your explanation should demonstrate that you are familiar with the definitions of the contracts you chose and at least one
similar type of contract.

References

VSE Corporation, "VSE Awarded $249 Million Cost-Plus Award Fee Contract Option Modification by Navy," Business Wire,

August      24,  2009,          www.businesswire.com/portal/site/home/permalink/?

ndmViewId=news_view&newsId=20090824006017&newsLang=en (accessed October 5, 2009).

This page titled 12.3: Selecting the Type of Contract is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                        12.3.6                                                     https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24724
12.4: Procurement Process

  Learning Objectives

    1. Describe the components of the procurement plan.
    2. Identify the decisions made when selecting the type of contract.
    3. Describe how bidders are qualified, solicited, and chosen.
    4. Identify the methods used to manage the contracts.

The project procurement cycle reflects the procurement activities from the decision to purchase the material or service through the
payment of the bills and closing of procurement contracts.

Procurement Plan

After the decision has been made to purchase goods or outsource services, the procurement team develops a plan that includes the
following:

    Selecting the appropriate relationships and contract approaches for each type of purchased goods or outsourced service
    Preparing RFQs and RFPs and evaluating partnership opportunities
    Evaluating RFQs, RFPs, and partnerships
    Awarding and signing contracts
    Managing quality, timely performance, and contract changes
    Closing contracts

Depending on the complexity level of the project, each of these steps can take either hours or sometimes weeks of work to
complete. Each of these steps is also included in the project master schedule. The time involved in the procurement cycle can
influence the scheduling of critical activities, including the decision to self-perform the work or contract the work to others. The
equipment and materials deliveries and completion of contracted work dates are placed on the project schedule and any
procurement activities that create a project delay or fall on the project critical path may require special attention.

Selecting the Contract Approach

The technical teams typically develop a description of the work that will be outsourced. From this information, the project
management team answers the following questions:

    Is the required work or materials a commodity, customized product or service, or unique skill or relationship?
    What type of relationship is needed: supplier, vendor, or partnership?
    How should the supplier, vendor, or potential partner be approached: RFQ, RFP, or personal contact?
    How well known is the scope of work?
    What are the risks and which party should assume which types of risk?
    Does the procurement of the service or goods affect activities on the project schedule's critical path and how much float is there
    on those activities?
    How important is it to be sure of the cost in advance?

The procurement team uses the answers to the first three questions listed above to determine the approach to obtaining the goods or
services and the remaining questions to determine what type of contract is most appropriate.

A key factor in selecting the contract approach is determining which party will take the most risk. The team determines the level of
risk that will be managed by the project and what risks will be transferred to the contractor. Typically, the project management team
wants to manage the project risk, but in some cases, contractors have more expertise or control that enable them to be better
positioned to manage the risk associated with the contracted work.

12.4.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24725
  Weather Risk on Concrete Contract

  On a construction contract, the concrete supplier will not be penalized for schedule delays caused by weather because the
  project team has more options for making up weather delays than the concrete supplier. The risk associated with weather
  remains with the project and not transferred through the contract.

The contractor knows more about the risks associated with obtaining the raw materials used to make concrete and assumes the risk
of delays caused by shortages of those materials.

Soliciting Bids

A solicitation is the process of requesting a price and supporting information from bidders. The solicitation usually takes the form
of either a request for quote (RFQ) or a request for proposal (RFP). Partnerships are pursued and established on a case-by-case
basis by senior management.

Qualifying Bidders

Potential bidders are people or organizations capable of providing the materials or performing the work required for the project. On
smaller, less complex projects, the parent company typically has a list of suppliers and vendors that have successfully provided
goods and services in the past, and the project has access to the performance record of companies on that list. On unique projects,
where no suppliers lists exist, the project team develops a list of potential suppliers and then qualifies them to become eligible to
bid on project work. Eligible bidders are placed on the bidders list and provided with a schedule of when work on the project will
be bid.

The eligibility of a supplier is determined by the ability to perform the work in a way that meets project requirements and
demonstrates financial stability. Ability to perform the work includes the ability to meet quality specifications and meet the project
schedule. During times when economic activity is high in a region, many suppliers become busy and stretch their resources. The
project team investigates the potential suppliers to assure they have the capacity and the track record of meeting deadlines before
they are included on the bidder's list.

The potential supplier must also be financially stable to be included on the bidders list. A credit check or a financial report from
Dun and Bradstreet (D&B)--a provider of financial information about individual companies--will provide the project with
information about the potential bidder's financial status. D&B services include the following:

    D&B proprietary rankings and predictive creditworthiness scores
    Public filings, including suits, liens, judgments, and UCC filings--standardized financial disclosure documents that conform to
    the uniform commercial code
    Comprehensive payment history, including D&B's Paydex Scores
    Company financial statements and history

Request for Quote

A request for quote focuses on price. The type of materials or service is well defined and can be obtained from several sources. The
bidder that can meet the project quality and schedule requirements usually wins the contract by quoting the lowest price.

Request for Proposal

A request for a proposal accounts for price but focuses on meeting the project quality or schedule requirements. The process of
developing a proposal in response to an RFP can be very expensive for the bidder, and the project team should not issue an RFP to
a company that is not eligible to win the bid.

Evaluating Bids

Evaluation of bids in response to RFQs for commodity items and services is heavily graded for price. In most cases, the lowest
total price will win the contract. The total price will include the costs of the goods or services, any shipping or delivery costs, the
value of any warranties, and any additional service that adds value to the project.

12.4.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24725
The evaluation of bids based on RFPs is more complex. The evaluation of proposals includes the price and also an evaluation of the
technical approach chosen by the bidder. The project team evaluating the proposal must include people with the expertise to
understand the technical aspects of the various proposal options and the value of each proposal to the project. On more complex
projects, the administrative part of the proposal is evaluated and scored by one team, and the technical aspect of the proposal is
evaluated by another team. The project team combines the two scores to determine the best proposal for the project.

Awarding the Contract

After the project team has selected the bidder that provides the best value to the project, a project representative validates all
conditions of the bid and the contract with the potential contractor. Less complex awards, like contracts for building materials,
require a reading and signing of the contract to assure the building materials supplier understands the contract terms and
requirements of the project schedule. More complex projects require a detailed discussion of the goals, the potential barriers to
accomplishing those goals, the project schedule and critical dates for the contract to make, and the processes for resolving conflicts
and improving work processes.

  Planning Session Follows Contract Award

  On a design and construction project to build a major industrial plant in the Chicago area, the project invited two critical
  partners to a three-day planning session after the project contracts were awarded.

The project manager began the session by stating that the project leadership intended to create an environment that enabled each of
the partners to exceed profit expectations on the project and that the only way to accomplish this goal was through a mutually
supportive team where everyone contributed to improve project performance and everyone benefited from better performance. The
session then focused on developing ways to resolve problems and increase performance. Although this may appear to be a simple
process of focusing contractors on project success, the process took several days of lengthy discussion and conflict resolution. The
effort invested in developing alignment between the project team and contractors can significantly improve project performance.

Managing the Contracts

The contract type determines the level of effort and the skills needed to manage the contract. The manager of supplier contracts
develops detailed specifications and assures compliance to these specifications. The manager of vendor contracts assures the
contractors that bid the work have the skills and capacity to accomplish the work according to the project schedule and tracks the
vendor's performance against the project needs, supplying support and direction when needed. The manager of partnering
arrangements develops alignment around common goals and work processes. Each of these approaches requires different skills and
various degrees of effort.

Items that take a long time to acquire--long lead items--receive early attention by the project leadership. Examples of long lead
items are equipment that is designed and built specifically for the project, curriculum that is created for training a new workforce,
and a customized bioreactor for a biotech project. These items might require weeks, months, and sometimes years to develop and
deliver to the project site. Long lead items that are procured through the normal procurement cycle may cause delays in the project,
and the project team identifies these items early to begin the procurement activities as soon as possible.

After the contract is awarded, the project team tracks the performance of the contractor against performance criteria in the contract
and his contribution to the performance of the project. Typically, the contractors deliver the product or service that meets the
quality expectations and supports the project schedule. Typically, there are also one or two contractors that do not perform to
project expectations. Some project managers will then pull out the contract and attempt to persuade the contractor to improve
performance or be penalized. Other project managers will explore with the contractor creative ways to improve performance and
meet project requirements. The contract management allows for both approaches to deal with nonperforming contractors and the
project team must assess what method is most likely to work in each situation.

12.4.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24725
  Building Support with Vendor on Chemical Plant Project

  Eastman Chemical was building a new plant at their Kingsport, Tennessee location when a critical vendor began falling behind
  schedule. The project team analyzed the situation and determined the vendor had taken on more work than it was capable of
  completing by the project's required due dates. This was an important vendor to the project and any delay in delivery from the
  vendor meant a delay in the completion of the project.

The project manager and Eastman executives flew to the vendor's plant in New Jersey and brought a large bar graph of the project
schedule. The discussion focused on the critical project dates and the importance of the equipment delivery dates. Eastman offered
technical support to the team and resources from the project to expedite the delivery. During lunch, Eastman executives and
managers from the project walked with the plant manager around the plant floor, talking with the skilled labor working on the
equipment. Eastman managers left Eastman hats and other small gifts as tokens of appreciation for their effort in supporting the
Eastman project.

    Managing contractor performance on a project is as important to the overall project outcomes as the work performed by the
    project team.

   Logistics and Expediting

    Equipment and materials that are purchased for use on the project must be transported, inventoried, warehoused, and often
    secured. This area of expertise is called logistics. The logistics for the project can be managed by the project team or can be
    included in the RFP or RFQ. On international projects, materials may be imported, and the procurement team manages the
    customs process. On smaller projects, the logistical function is often provided by the parent company. On larger projects, these
    activities are typically contracted to companies that specialize in logistical services. On larger, more complex projects, that
    procurement team will include logistical expertise.

    The project work often depends on materials procured for the project. The delivery of these materials influences the scheduling
    of the project, and often some materials are needed earlier than normal procurement practices would deliver. On long lead
    items, the project schedule is included in the contracting plans and contractors must explain how they will support the project
    schedule.

    On large, complex projects, critical items might be scheduled for delivery after they are needed on the project. The procurement
    team then explores ideas with the contractor to expedite--speed up--the manufacturing or transportation of the equipment or
    materials. The contract can often place a priority on the fabrication of the equipment and delivery of the equipment to meet the
    project schedule. The project logistics team can also explore ways of shortening the transportation time. For example, a project
    in Argentina flew some critical equipment from Sweden rather than transport the equipment by ship to save several weeks in
    transit. The logistics costs were higher, but the overall value to the project was greater.

    Key Takeaways
        The procurement plan includes determining the category of materials or services, choosing the type of contractual
        relationship, soliciting bids, selecting bidders, managing the work, and closing the contracts.
        The decisions made when selecting the type of contract are based on whether the materials can be provided by suppliers,
        vendors, or partners; how well defined the work is; how the risk will be shared; the importance of the task to the schedule;
        and the need for certainty of the cost.
        Companies that bid on contracts are evaluated on past performance and current financial status. RFQs and RFPs are sent to
        those companies. RFQs are evaluated on price and RFPs are evaluated on price and method.
        Long lead time items are identified and monitored. Items that are critical to the schedule or delayed are assigned to an
        expediter. The logistics of handling delivery, storage, and transportation are determined. Work and materials are inspected
        for quality.

   Exercises

     1. Materials that are widely available with standardized quality are ____________, which are provided by ______________.
     2. The financial soundness of a vendor can be measured by the ratings provided by __________ (company name).

12.4.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24725
     3. If an item takes a long time to deliver or if it is an important item, an _________ might be assigned to be sure it is delivered
        on time.

    Internalize your learning experience by preparing to discuss the following.
    Assume that you are managing a project to replace the heating and cooling system in an old building and you would like to
    consider alternatives that are more environmentally sustainable in addition to the typical systems. How would you go about it?
    Describe what type of relationship you think you need, what type of contract you would choose, and how you would identify
    and select a provider.

This page titled 12.4: Procurement Process is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

12.4.5  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24725
12.5: Project Closure

  Learning Objectives

    1. Describe the procedures for closing out contracts.
    2. Describe the elements and purpose of the postproject review process.
    3. Identify the types of documents that should be archived.
    4. Identify the objectives of the project closeout celebration.

Team members who were excited by the project in its early stages may find it difficult to maintain their focus to complete the
project. They might already be looking forward to the next project. Bringing a project to an end requires a different management
style that focuses on details as well as an analysis of the decisions that were made.

Closeout Procurement Contracts

The last stage of the project procurement cycle includes the payment of the bills and closing of procurement contracts.

Contracts with Suppliers

Suppliers provide commodities that should meet standards of quality. The project team must check the records of deliveries made
and determine that they were acceptable quality. If any items were rejected for poor quality or not delivered, the final payment is
adjusted accordingly.

Punch Lists and Performance Tests

If a vendor is providing a service or building something for the project, there are usually items that must be fixed or mistakes that
must be corrected before the contract is complete. On a software project, performance tests are run on the software, usually by the
people who will be using the software, and any performance expectations not met are noted. Sometimes the expectations were not
captured in the project scope of work and sometimes the performance did not meet the expectations established in the scope. If the
items were not in the scope of work and the owner wants the work done, then the owner typically issues a change order. If the
expectations were in the scope of work, the contractor is still responsible for completing the work.

On a project to build a new house, the owner might go through the house looking for minor items not completed by the contractor.
Before the contract is closed, any minor items that need to be repaired or completed are placed on a punch list, which is a list of all
the items found by the owner that still remain to be done. The project team will then work on all of the items on the list, building a
small schedule to complete the remaining work.

If the number of items on the punch list is too large or the amount of work is significant, the project team continues to work the
project. Once the punch list becomes smaller, the project manager begins closing down the project, maintaining only enough staff
and equipment to support the team that is working the punch list.

Transfer to Customer or Sponsor

If the product of the project is a building, software system, or something that must be operated and maintained by someone else, it
must be turned over to the people who will be responsible for it after the project is complete. They might perform their own
inspection to determine if the project team has met its goals for quality and that all elements of the project are complete. These
performance tests are typically identified in the original project contract.

Final Payments

The final payment is usually more than a simple percentage of the work that remains to be completed. Completing the project
might involve fixing the most difficult problems that are disproportionately expensive to solve, so the final payment should be large
enough to motivate the vendor to give the project a high priority so that the project can be completed on time.

If the supplier has met all the contractual obligations, including fixing problems and making repairs as noted on a punch list, the
project team signs off on the contract and submits it to the accounting department for final payment. The supplier is notified that

12.5.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24726
the last payment is final and completes the contractual agreement between the supplier and the project.

  Overtime Needed to Complete Project and Earn Final Payment

  The building automation vendor devoted additional personnel and paid them overtime wages to troubleshoot the problems and
  get them resolved so the building could open on time. When the project team was satisfied, they approved the system and the
  final payment.

Postproject Evaluations

Before the team is dissolved and begins to focus on the next project, a review is conducted to capture the lessons that can be
learned from this project, often called a lessons learned meeting or document. The team explores what went well and captures the
processes to understand why they went well. The team asks if the process is transferable to other projects. The team also explores
what did not go well and what people learned from the experience. The process is not to find blame but to learn.

Quality management is a process of continuous improvement that includes learning from past projects and making changes to
improve the next project. This process is documented as evidence that quality management practices are in use. Some organizations
have formal processes for changing work processes and integrating the lessons learned from the project so other projects can
benefit. Some organizations are less formal in the approach and expect individuals to learn from the experience and take the
experience to their next project and share what they learned with others in a very informal way.

Project Profile Evaluation

One of the first activities was to create a project profile to determine where the challenges were most likely to occur. If the Darnall-
Preston Complexity Index (DPCI) was used, each of the complexity evaluations is reviewed and compared to actual events that
occurred during the project. The team explores the changes in the complexity level during the life of the project and how the team
managed the complexity during the life of the project. Learning from this exercise develops expertise that is useful in making the
next project profile. The DPCI rating is adjusted, if necessary, for reference purposes on future projects.

Trust and Alignment Effectiveness

The project leadership reviews the effect of trust--or lack of trust--on the project and the effectiveness of alignment meetings at
building trust. The team determines which problems might have been foreseen and mitigated and which ones could not have been
reasonably predicted. What were the cues that were missed by the team that indicated a problem was emerging? What could the
team have done to better predict and prevent trust issues?

Schedule Management

The original schedule of activities and the network diagram are compared to the actual schedule of events. Events that caused
changes to the schedule are reviewed to see how the use of contingency reserves and float mitigated the disruption caused by those
events. The original estimates of contingency time are reviewed to determine if they were adequate and the estimates of duration
and float were accurate. These activities are necessary for the project team to develop expertise in estimating schedule elements in
future projects--they are not used to place blame.

Budget Management

A review of budget estimates for the cost of work scheduled is compared to the actual costs. If the estimates are frequently different
from the actual costs, the choice of estimating method is reviewed.

Risk Mitigation

After the project is finished, the estimates of risk can be reviewed and compared to the events that actually took place. Did events
take place on the project that were unforeseen? What cues existed that may have allowed the team to predict these events? Was the
project contingency sufficient to cover unforeseen risks? Even if nothing went wrong on this project, it is not proof that risk
mitigation was a waste of money, but it is useful to compare the cost of avoiding risk versus the cost of unexpected events to
understand how much it cost to avoid risk.

12.5.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24726
Procurement Contracts

The performance of suppliers and vendors is reviewed to determine if they should still be included in the list of qualified suppliers
or vendors. The choice of contract for each is reviewed to determine if the decision to share risk was justified and if the choice of
incentives worked.

Customer Satisfaction

Relationships with the client are reviewed and decisions about including the client in project decisions and alignment meetings are
discussed. The client is given the opportunity to express satisfaction and identify areas in which to improve. Often a senior manager
from the organization interviews the client to develop feedback on the project team performance.

Reports

The results of the postproject evaluations are summarized in reports for external and internal use.

Stakeholders

A general report that provides an overview of the project is created to provide stakeholders with a summary of the project. The
report includes the original goals and objectives and statements that show how the project met those goals and objectives.
Performance on the schedule and budget are summarized and an assessment of client satisfaction is provided. A version of this
report can be provided to the client as a stakeholder and as another means for deriving feedback.

Senior Management

The report to senior management contains all the information provided to the stakeholders in a short executive summary. The report
identifies practices and processes that could be improved or lessons that were learned that could be useful on future projects.

Document Archival

The documents associated with the project must be stored in a safe location where they can be retrieved for future reference. Signed
contracts or other documents that might be used in tax reviews or lawsuits must be stored. Organizations will have legal document
storage and retrieval policies that apply to project documents and must be followed. Some project documents can be stored
electronically.

Care should be taken to store documents in a form that can be recovered easily. If the documents are stored electronically, standard
naming conventions should be used so documents can be sorted and grouped by name. If documents are stored in paper form, the
expiration date of the documents should be determined so they can be destroyed at some point in the future. The following are
documents that are typically archived:

    Charter documents
    Scope statement
    Original budget
    Change documents
    DPCI ratings
    Manager's summary--lessons learned
    Final DPCI rating

Project Celebration

A symbolic ending of a project can be a final celebration to mark the end of the project and perhaps the dissolution of the team. The
end of a major project is often a time to reflect. Project team members and stakeholders have typically invested a great deal of time
and emotional energy into the success of the project. Because of this investment and because of the close relationships that develop
during a project, project closure in often sad. Project managers stay tuned into the project team environment and use celebrations
and team recognition to ameliorate the effects of project closure.

This is an opportunity to improve client satisfaction and team member satisfaction. Awards or recognition plaques might be given
out to individuals who made an outstanding contribution to the project. Celebrating and reviewing the challenges and successes of

12.5.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24726
the project creates a positive memory of the project and reinforces the learning that can be transferred to future projects. Groups or
teams can be recognized and instances where trust between team members made a positive difference can be rewarded.

The client can be praised for contributions during planning and execution of the project.

Key Takeaways
    To close contracts, systems are tested, materials are inspected, and punch lists of work to be completed are made.
    The purpose of the postproject review is to examine decisions that were made with partial knowledge with the way the project
    actually developed to learn from the experience and to improve future decisions. It is also used to identify processes that can be
    improved.
    Original project documents, such as the charter, scope statement, and budget, are stored. Documents developed during the
    project, such as change agreements, are stored. Postproject reviews, including a summary of lessons learned and a final project
    profile description--DPCI rating--are saved.
    At the project closeout celebration, positive behavior is awarded for individuals, and groups and the client or sponsor is invited
    to speak to enforce a sense of satisfaction.

Exercises

 1. Why is a postproject review valuable to future projects?
 2. Which documents should be archived?
 3. Why should the project have a closeout celebration?

Internalize your learning experience by preparing to discuss the following.

Consider why it would be important to withhold a significant amount for the final payment. If you are familiar with a situation
where a contractor had to spend extra to fix or finish items to complete a job, describe why they might need a financial incentive to
get those jobs done.

This page titled 12.5: Project Closure is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

12.5.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24726
12.6: Exercises

Exercises at the end of the chapter are designed to strengthen your understanding and retention of the information recently acquired
in the chapter.

Essay Questions

Write several paragraphs to provide more in-depth analysis and consideration when answering the following questions.

 1. Describe an activity that would require an RFP and why it should be handled with an RFP instead of a RFQ or a partnership.
 2. Describe a procurement task. Rate it for the amount of uncertainty of the scope, cost, schedule, and risk. Choose a contract type

    and explain why that contract type would be an appropriate choice for that set of uncertainties.
 3. Describe requirements of a particular quality method, and describe how a postproject review would meet that standard.

Discussion

The exercises in this section are designed to promote exchange of information among students in the classroom or in an online
discussion. The exercises are more open ended, which means that what you find might be completely different from what your
classmates find, and you can all benefit by sharing what you have learned.

 1. Research the document retention standards at an organization of your choice that apply to normal business records. Describe
    how those standards would or would not meet the needs of project document archival. Be prepared to compare the standards of
    the organization you described with those described by your classmates.

 2. Describe a situation with which you are familiar where conflicts arose over completion of punch list items or fixing items to
    complete a project.

This page titled 12.6: Exercises is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

12.6.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24727
12.7: Web Exercises

  Learning Objectives
    1. Locate commodities in online catalogs.
    2. Use an RFQ template obtained online.
    3. Use an RFP template obtained online.
    4. Describe and interpret D&B financial reports using definitions from the D&B website.

Locate Commodities in Online Catalogs

Commodities can be purchased from online catalogs if the buyer knows exactly what is needed for the task.

Learn More about Using an Online Catalog to Buy Commodities

Complete the exercise by following these instructions:
 1. Open a blank document in a word processing program and then save the document as Ch12CommoditiesStudentName.doc.

    Leave the document open.
 2. Use your web browser and go to http://www.eastmfg.com. The catalog is provided in PDF format. This format is not easily

    changed by the viewer.
 3. Click the Parts menu and then click the link to the Hardware Catalog shown in Figure 12.11 "Parts Catalog".

                                                                          Figure 12.11 Parts Catalog
    Source: Courtesy of http://www.eastmfg.com.
 4. In the Search box, type Lynch Pin and then press Enter. Refer to Figure 12.12 "Searching for a Part".

                                                                     Figure 12.12 Searching for a Part

   Source: Courtesy of http://www.eastmfg.com.

5. Notice the following characteristics:
       The price is not listed. Separate price lists are often maintained for different classes of customer, and discounts are usually
       available for large orders.
       There is a unique catalog number for each type of anchor. This number is used for placing orders.
       The part's capacity, size, and weight are provided.
       Some labels require knowledge of the product to understand; for example, Side Swing Pin.

6. Capture this screen and paste it into Ch12CommoditiesStudentName.doc.

12.7.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24728
Analysis

 1. At the bottom of Ch12CommoditiesStudentName.doc, write between one hundred and two hundred words to describe how to
    navigate and interpret an online catalog that is provided in PDF format.

 2. Review your work and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

Element                       Best                             Adequate                   Poor

File name                     Ch12CommoditiesStudentNa         .docx version              Student name not included
                              me.doc

Locate commodities in online  Two screen captures; a           Same as Best               Missing screens; inaccurate
catalogs                      description of how to navigate                              description
                              an online catalog in PDF
                              format

3. Save the file and submit it as directed by the instructor.

Use an Online RFQ Template

Commodities can be services that are specifically defined and common enough to have standardized descriptions and quality. In
this exercise, you download a template for writing an RFQ from the state of Massachusetts for requesting quotes on testing
software for accessibility compliance.

Locate and Download an RFQ Template

Complete the exercise by following these instructions:

 1. Open a blank document in a word processing program and then save the document as Ch12RFQStudentName.doc Leave the
    document open.

 2. Use your web browser to type www.mass.gov/dep/recycle/reduce/rmrfq.pdf.
 3. Scroll to the Preface page, as shown in Figure 12.13 "Description of RFQ Template".
 4. Add this web address to your browser's bookmarks or favorites list in the Project Management folder.
 5. Capture a screen that shows the address in the Project Management folder in the favorites or bookmarks and then paste it into

    Ch12RFQStudentName.doc.
 6. Scroll through appendices at the end of the document. Capture a screen from one of these appendices pages and then paste it

    into Ch12RFQStudentName.doc.

Analysis

 1. At the bottom of Ch12RFQStudentName.doc, write between one hundred and two hundred words to describe the advantages of
    using a template. Make specific reference to at least two sections of the RFQ template used in the first part of this exercise,
    including page references.

 2. Review your work and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

Element                       Best                             Adequate                   Poor

File name                     Ch12RFQStudentName.doc .docx version                        Student name not included

Use an RFQ template obtained  A screen capture that shows a    Project Management folder  Missing screens; only one
online                        link to the template in the      does not show links from   feature discussed; no page
                              Project Management folder in     previous exercises         references
                              the bookmarks or favorites;
                              screen capture of one of the
                              first eight pages; reflective
                              essay between one hundred
                              and two hundred words on use
                              of a RFQ template

                                                               12.7.2                     https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24728
 3. Save the file and submit it as directed by the instructor.

Use an Online RFP Template

If you need to rely on the vendor's experience and expertise to solve a problem, you can request companies to submit proposals on
how they would go about it. The state of Maryland provides a template for RFPs.

Locate and Download an RFP Template

Complete the exercise by following these instructions:

 1. Open a blank document in a word processing program and then save the document as Ch12RFPStudentName.doc. Leave the
    document open.

 2. In a browser, type energy.maryland.gov/documents/ProcurementConsultingServicesRFPFINAL.pdf. An RFP template used by
    the Maryland Energy Administration displays as a PDF file, as shown in Figure 12.14 "Source of RFQ Template".

                                                                   Figure 12.14 Source of RFQ Template

    Source: Courtesy of Maryland Energy Administration.

 3. Add this web address to your browser's bookmarks or favorites in the Project Management folder.
 4. Capture a screen that shows the address in the Project Management folder in the favorites or bookmarks and then paste it into

    Ch12RFPStudentName.doc.
 5. Scroll to section 1.7 Pre-Proposal Conference. Observe that many organizations give contractors an opportunity to meet and ask

    questions before they prepare a proposal.
 6. Scroll back to page ii, Project No. Observe that the state asks the contractors who decide not to bid to explain why.
 7. Capture the screen that shows the list of reasons why the contractor chose not to bid, and then paste it into

    Ch12RFPStudentName.doc.
 8. Explore the other sections of this RFP template and choose one that is new to you or that you find most interesting.

Analysis

 1. At the bottom of Ch12RFPStudentName.doc, write between one hundred and two hundred words to describe what you learned
    from each of the three sections: the pre-proposal conference, the refusal to bid, and the third section of your choice. Make
    specific reference to each of the three sections of the RFP template used in Part I including page references.

 2. Review your work and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

12.7.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24728
Element                       Best                             Adequate                   Poor
                                                               .docx version              Student name not included
File name                     Ch12RFPStudentName.doc
                                                               Project Management folder  Missing screens; four sections
Use an RFP template obtained  A screen capture that shows a    does not show links from   not discussed individually; no
online                        link to the template in the      previous exercises         page references
                              Project Management folder in
                              the bookmarks or favorites;
                              screen capture of the
                              preproposal conference;
                              reflective essay between one
                              hundred and two hundred
                              words on the conference,
                              refusal, and one other section
                              with specific page references

3. Save the file and submit it as directed by the instructor.

Interpret D&B Financial Ratings

The relationship between the project and its suppliers and vendors involves trust that both parties will keep their financial
commitments. This trust may be based on past experience, but it can also be based on a third party's rating of the financial health of
the organization and its past behavior. For example, organizations with better credit ratings can negotiate lower prices with
suppliers and vendors because there is less risk. One of the most popular rating agencies is D&B. In this exercise, you locate and
review the types of financial reports that are available from D&B.

Locate and Review the Financial Reports Available from D&B

Complete the exercise by following these instructions:

 1. Open a blank document in a word processing program and then save the document as Ch12DBStudentName.doc. Leave the
    document open.

 2. In a browser, type www.dnb.com/us/customer_service/scores.html. The D&B web page displays, as shown in Figure 12.15
    "D&B Ratings".

 3. Add this web address to your browser's bookmarks or favorites in the Project Management folder.
 4. Capture a screen that shows the address in the Project Management folder in the favorites or bookmarks and then paste it into

    Ch12DBStudentName.doc.
 5. Scroll down the page to the D&B Rating Interpretation table. The rating in the first column indicates the worth of the company,

    and the numbers 1 through 4 indicate its general credit worthiness, where 1 is high and 4 is low. For example, a rating of 1A-4
    indicates a company with a worth between $500,000 and $749,999 with a low credit worthiness rating.
 6. Capture this screen and paste it into Ch12DBStudentName.doc.
 7. Scroll down to the US Employee Range Designation table. Notice this rating indicates the number of employees, where ER1 is
    more than 1,000.
 8. Capture this screen and paste it into Ch12DBStudentName.doc.
 9. Scroll down to the D&B PAYDEX Value table. Observe that the PAYDEX score indicates when the company pays its debts.
    Notice that paying off debts sooner than is contractually required earns a PAYDEX score above 80.
10. Capture this screen and paste it into Ch12DBStudentName.doc.
11. Scroll down to the Financial Stress Score table. Notice that companies with a score of 1 are estimated to have a probability of
    failure of .03 percent (3 per 10,000) of failing in the next twelve months, while a rating of 5 means a probability of failure of 4.7
    percent (almost 1 in 20).
12. Capture this screen and paste it into Ch12DBStudentName.doc.

                                                               12.7.4                     https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24728
Analysis

 1. At the bottom of Ch12DBStudentName.doc, write between one hundred and two hundred words to describe the function of
    these four tables.

 2. Explain what it would mean if a company had the following D&B ratings:

BB-1

ER3

PAYDEX 80
Financial stress: 4

3. Review your work and use the following rubric to determine its adequacy:

Element                     Best                             Adequate        Poor

File name                   Ch12DBStudentName.doc            .docx version   Student name not included

Describe and interpret D&B  A screen capture that shows a    Same as Best    Missing screens; incorrect
financial reports using     link to the template in the                      interpretation of table;
definitions online          Project Management folder in                     incorrect interpretation of
                            the bookmarks or favorites;                      ratings
                            four screens that show the four
                            tables; reflective essay
                            between one hundred and two
                            hundred words on use of D&B
                            ratings; interpretation of
                            example scores

 4. Save the file and submit it as directed by the instructor.

This page titled 12.7: Web Exercises is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                                   12.7.5                    https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/24728
Index                                                     business card                                        codes

A                                                            6.5: Software and Technology Exercises               6.5: Software and Technology Exercises

accessibility                                             business risk                                        collaboration

   InfoPage                                                  11.1: Defining Risk                                  4.2: Understanding Values and Expectations
                                                                                                                  6.2: Selecting Software
accountability                                            C                                                       8.5: Project Scheduling Software
                                                                                                                  8.7: Software and Technology Exercises
   4.2: Understanding Values and Expectations             calls
                                                                                                               collaborativelearning
activity sequencing                                          6.5: Software and Technology Exercises
                                                                                                                  InfoPage
   8.2: Elements of Time Management                       Canvas
                                                                                                               commodities
activityduration                                             TitlePage
                                                                                                                  12.7: Web Exercises
   8.3: Critical Path and Float                           cash flow
                                                                                                               communication matrix
actual cost                                                  7.7: Software and Technology Exercise
                                                                                                                  7.5: Communications Planning
   9.3: Exercises                                         cashflow                                                7.6: Exercises

adaptation                                                   9.2: Managing the Budget                          communication methods

   2.5: Exercises                                         cellphones                                              6.1: Types of Communication

adaptive systems                                             6.5: Software and Technology Exercises            communication planning

   2.3: Complex Systems and the Darnall-Preston           central limit theorem                                   7.4: Alignment Process
Complexity Index
                                                             10.1: Quality and Statistics                      communication technologies
alignment
                                                          change management                                       6.1: Types of Communication
   7.4: Alignment Process                                                                                         6.3: Exercises
                                                             2.3: Complex Systems and the Darnall-Preston
AlignmentProcess                                          Complexity Index                                     communicationskills

   7: Starting a Project                                     4.3: Dealing with Problems                           5.5: Web Exercises
                                                             12.3: Selecting the Type of Contract
ambiguity                                                                                                      CommunicationsPlanning
                                                          character count
   3.3: Using the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index to                                                             7: Starting a Project
Measure Organizational Complexity                            4: Understanding and Meeting Client Expectations
                                                                                                               competitive advantage
analogous estimate                                        classification
                                                                                                                  10: Managing Project Quality
   9.1: Estimating Costs                                     9: Estimating and Managing Costs
                                                                                                               complex projects
analysis                                                  classification settings
                                                                                                                  8.5: Project Scheduling Software
   2.5: Exercises                                            4: Understanding and Meeting Client Expectations
   4.6: Web Exercises                                                                                          complex systems
   5.5: Web Exercises                                     classification_settings
   10.6: Exercises                                                                                                2.5: Exercises
                                                             5: Working with People on Projects
assuring quality                                                                                               complexity
                                                          classroom discussion
   10: Managing Project Quality                                                                                   2.3: Complex Systems and the Darnall-Preston
                                                             5.4: Exercises                                    Complexity Index
asynchronous communication                                   7.6: Exercises
                                                                                                                  2.4: Darnall-Preston Complexity Index Structure
   6.1: Types of Communication                            classroom interaction                                   7.2: Project Scope
                                                                                                                  11.4: Project Risk and the Project Complexity Profile
audio                                                        1.6: Exercises
                                                                                                               complexity in organizations
   1.7: Web Exercise                                      client
                                                                                                                  3.4: Exercises
automotive                                                   4.6: Web Exercises
                                                                                                               complexity index
   7.2: Project Scope                                     client expectations
                                                                                                                  2.6: Software and Technology Exercise
B                                                            4.2: Understanding Values and Expectations
                                                                                                               complexity management
back matter                                               client involvement
                                                                                                                  7.4: Alignment Process
   Licensing                                                 4.5: Exercises
                                                                                                               ComplexityIndexStructure
benchmarking                                              client satisfaction
                                                                                                                  2: Project Profiling
   10.4: Planning and Controlling Project Quality            1.1: Project Management Defined
                                                             1.6: Exercises                                    complexityscore
bid evaluation                                               4.5: Exercises
                                                             7.5: Communications Planning                         3.3: Using the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index to
   12.2: Procurement Plan                                                                                      Measure Organizational Complexity
                                                          clientcommunication
bidding                                                                                                        complexsystems
                                                             4.4: Nurturing a Feeling of Satisfaction
   12.4: Procurement Process                                                                                      2: Project Profiling
                                                          clientengagement                                        2.3: Complex Systems and the Darnall-Preston
breakdown                                                                                                      Complexity Index
                                                             4.1: Including the Client
   Licensing                                                 4.4: Nurturing a Feeling of Satisfaction          comprehensive analysis

budget                                                    clientmanagement                                        3.4: Exercises

   9.2: Managing the Budget                                  4.1: Including the Client                         computer skills
   11.4: Project Risk and the Project Complexity Profile
                                                          clientparticipation                                     1.8: Software and Technology Exercises
budgeted cost
                                                             4.1: Including the Client                         conceptual schedule
   9.4: Software and Technology Exercise
                                                          clientrelations                                         8.1: Types of Schedules
budgeting
                                                             4.3: Dealing with Problems                        conference call
   7.3: Project Start-Up
   9.1: Estimating Costs                                  clipboard                                               6.3: Exercises
   12.3: Selecting the Type of Contract                                                                           6.4: Web Exercise
                                                             1.8: Software and Technology Exercises
business                                                                                                       conflict resolution
                                                          closeout
   TitlePage                                                                                                      4.2: Understanding Values and Expectations
                                                             3.1: Project Phases
conflictresolution                                       credibility                                            distribution

   5.1: Working with Individuals                            1.4: Key Skills of the Project Manager                 10.7: Software and Technology Exercises

construction                                             critical_path                                          document control

   12.1: Identifying the Need for Resources Outside the     8: Project Time Management                             7.5: Communications Planning
Organization
                                                         criticalpath                                           document retention
constructionindustry
                                                            8.3: Critical Path and Float                           12.6: Exercises
   2.1: Using a Project Profile
                                                         cultural differences                                   documentation
constructionprojects
                                                            5.4: Exercises                                         1.8: Software and Technology Exercises
   2.4: Darnall-Preston Complexity Index Structure                                                                 2.6: Software and Technology Exercise
                                                         customersatisfaction                                      6.4: Web Exercise
contingency allowances
                                                            12.5: Project Closure                               downloadinstructions
   11.5: Exercises
                                                         D                                                         3.5: Web Exercise
contingency budget
                                                         DarnallPrestonComplexityIndex                          DPCI
   11.3: Project Risk by Phases
                                                            2: Project Profiling                                   2.6: Software and Technology Exercise
contingency plan                                            3: Project Phases and Organization
                                                            3.3: Using the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index to  E
   11.2: Risk Management Process                         Measure Organizational Complexity
                                                                                                                earlestartdates
continuous improvement                                   data analysis
                                                                                                                   8.3: Critical Path and Float
   1.3: Project Context                                     2.6: Software and Technology Exercise
   10.2: Development of Quality as a Competitive            10.1: Quality and Statistics                        earned value
Advantage
   10.4: Planning and Controlling Project Quality        data management                                           9.3: Exercises

continuousimprovement                                       6.2: Selecting Software                             earned value analysis
                                                            6.3: Exercises
   10.3: Relevance of Quality Programs to Project           8.6: Exercises                                         9.4: Software and Technology Exercise
Quality
                                                         dataanalysis                                           earned value management
contract management
                                                            11.6: Web Exercise                                     9.3: Exercises
   12.4: Procurement Process
                                                         date and time                                          earnedvalueanalysis
contract selection
                                                            6.4: Web Exercise                                      9.2: Managing the Budget
   12: Project Procurement and Closure
                                                         dealing with problems                                  economic factors
contract type
                                                            4: Understanding and Meeting Client Expectations       9.1: Estimating Costs
   12.6: Exercises
                                                         decision making                                        education
contractCloseout
                                                            4.5: Exercises                                         8.7: Software and Technology Exercises
   12.5: Project Closure                                    5.4: Exercises                                         10.6: Exercises

contracting                                              decisionmaking                                         efficiency

   12.3: Selecting the Type of Contract                     4.3: Dealing with Problems                             12.1: Identifying the Need for Resources Outside the
                                                            5.3: Creating a Project Culture                     Organization
control limits                                              11.6: Web Exercise
                                                                                                                elements_of_time_management
   10.1: Quality and Statistics                          delegating work
                                                                                                                   8: Project Time Management
controlling                                                 5.4: Exercises
                                                                                                                elevator story
   10: Managing Project Quality                          Deming
                                                                                                                   5.4: Exercises
corrective action                                           10.2: Development of Quality as a Competitive
                                                         Advantage                                              emotionalintelligence
   10.5: Assuring Quality
                                                            10.6: Exercises                                        5.1: Working with Individuals
cost                                                                                                               5.5: Web Exercises
                                                         design phase
   12.1: Identifying the Need for Resources Outside the                                                         empathy
Organization                                                7.6: Exercises
                                                                                                                   5.1: Working with Individuals
cost control                                             detail schedule
                                                                                                                energy policy
   12.3: Selecting the Type of Contract                     8.1: Types of Schedules
                                                                                                                   1.2: Project Defined
cost estimation                                          detailed licensing
                                                                                                                engineering projects
   9.1: Estimating Costs                                    Licensing
                                                                                                                   2.2: Project Profiling Models
cost management                                          deviation
                                                                                                                environmental impact
   1.1: Project Management Defined                          10.7: Software and Technology Exercises
                                                                                                                   2.5: Exercises
cost performance index                                   dialing
                                                                                                                essay questions
   9.3: Exercises                                           6.5: Software and Technology Exercises
                                                                                                                   4.5: Exercises
cost variance                                            dialog                                                    5.4: Exercises
                                                                                                                   7.6: Exercises
   9.3: Exercises                                           9: Estimating and Managing Costs                       12.6: Exercises
   9.4: Software and Technology Exercise
                                                         dictionary                                             estimate at completion
costmanagement
                                                            1.7: Web Exercise                                      9.3: Exercises
   5.3: Creating a Project Culture
                                                         digital organization                                   estimate to complete
costofquality
                                                            1.8: Software and Technology Exercises                 9.4: Software and Technology Exercise
   10.3: Relevance of Quality Programs to Project
Quality                                                  discussion                                             estimatingcosts

costperformanceindex                                        2.5: Exercises                                         9: Estimating and Managing Costs
                                                            6.3: Exercises
   9.2: Managing the Budget                                 10.6: Exercises                                     Excel
                                                            11.5: Exercises
CPI                                                                                                                2.6: Software and Technology Exercise
                                                         discussion exercises                                      6.2: Selecting Software
   9.4: Software and Technology Exercise                                                                           8.7: Software and Technology Exercises
                                                            1.6: Exercises
creating_project_culture

   5: Working with People on Projects
Excel 2007                                                information flow                                    lean manufacturing

   7.7: Software and Technology Exercise                     7.5: Communications Planning                        1.3: Project Context

execution                                                 information sharing                                 learning objectives

   3.1: Project Phases                                       6.1: Types of Communication                         8.2: Elements of Time Management
                                                                                                                 8.5: Project Scheduling Software
executionplan                                             initiation
                                                                                                              learning_path
   11.4: Project Risk and the Project Complexity Profile     3.1: Project Phases
                                                                                                                 5: Working with People on Projects
expectations                                              innovation
                                                                                                              learningObjective
   4: Understanding and Meeting Client Expectations          5.3: Creating a Project Culture
                                                             6.3: Exercises                                      3.3: Using the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index to
external complexity                                                                                           Measure Organizational Complexity
                                                          installation
   2.6: Software and Technology Exercise                                                                         8.3: Critical Path and Float
                                                             1.8: Software and Technology Exercises
F                                                                                                             learningobjectives
                                                          institutional memory
file format                                                                                                      5.5: Web Exercises
                                                             2.5: Exercises                                      12.5: Project Closure
   6.4: Web Exercise
                                                          interactivelearning                                 LearningPath
filtering
                                                             InfoPage                                            9: Estimating and Managing Costs
   8.6: Exercises
                                                          Internal Rate of Return                             legal agreements
finalsubmission
                                                             7.7: Software and Technology Exercise               12.3: Selecting the Type of Contract
   3.5: Web Exercise
                                                          international                                       LibreTexts
financial analysis
                                                             6.5: Software and Technology Exercises              InfoPage
   7.7: Software and Technology Exercise
                                                          international competition                           licensing
financial ratings
                                                             10.6: Exercises                                     Licensing
   12.7: Web Exercises
                                                          investment                                          local time
financial reports
                                                             7.7: Software and Technology Exercise               6.4: Web Exercise
   12.7: Web Exercises
                                                          IRR                                                 low complexity projects
financialmanagement
                                                             7.7: Software and Technology Exercise               8.5: Project Scheduling Software
   9.2: Managing the Budget
                                                          ISO                                                 M                                                 Profile
FinancialRisk
                                                             10.3: Relevance of Quality Programs to Project   management
   11.6: Web Exercise                                     Quality
                                                                                                                 TitlePage
flexibility                                               ISO 9000
                                                                                                              management leadership
   1.4: Key Skills of the Project Manager                    10.2: Development of Quality as a Competitive
                                                          Advantage                                              10.6: Exercises
float
                                                          K                                                   managing_the_schedule
   8: Project Time Management
   8.3: Critical Path and Float                           kaizen                                                 8: Project Time Management

flowcharting                                                 10.2: Development of Quality as a Competitive    managingbudget
                                                          Advantage
   10.4: Planning and Controlling Project Quality                                                                9: Estimating and Managing Costs
                                                             10.6: Exercises
formulas                                                                                                      master schedule
                                                          key skills
   7.7: Software and Technology Exercise                                                                         8.1: Types of Schedules
                                                             1: Introduction to Project Management
freefloat                                                                                                     medium complexity projects
                                                          key supplier relationship
   8.3: Critical Path and Float                                                                                  8.5: Project Scheduling Software
                                                             12.2: Procurement Plan
frequency distribution                                                                                        meeting management
                                                          key takeaways
   10.1: Quality and Statistics                                                                                  7.5: Communications Planning
                                                             8.5: Project Scheduling Software
funding                                                                                                       meetingAgenda
                                                          knowledge areas
   7.1: Project Selection                                                                                        5.5: Web Exercises
                                                             1: Introduction to Project Management
G                                                                                                             Microsoft
                                                          known risks
Gantt charts                                                                                                     6.2: Selecting Software
                                                             11.1: Defining Risk
   8.6: Exercises                                            11.5: Exercises                                  milestone celebrations

GMT                                                       L                                                      4.5: Exercises

   6.4: Web Exercise                                      lack of trust                                       milestones

goals                                                        7.6: Exercises                                      4.4: Nurturing a Feeling of Satisfaction
                                                                                                                 4.6: Web Exercises
   7.1: Project Selection                                 latestartdates                                         8.2: Elements of Time Management
                                                                                                                 8.4: Managing the Schedule
H                                                            8.3: Critical Path and Float
                                                                                                              mission
headphones                                                Leadership
                                                                                                                 7.1: Project Selection
   1.7: Web Exercise                                         2.4: Darnall-Preston Complexity Index Structure
                                                             5.2: Working with Groups and Teams               mission statement
I                                                            5.3: Creating a Project Culture
                                                             10.2: Development of Quality as a Competitive       7.6: Exercises
including the client                                      Advantage
                                                                                                              mitigation plan
   4: Understanding and Meeting Client Expectations       leadershipskills
                                                                                                                 11.5: Exercises
information                                                  1.4: Key Skills of the Project Manager
                                                                                                              mitigationplan
   4.6: Web Exercises                                     leadershipstyles
                                                                                                                 11.4: Project Risk and the Project Complexity
information exchange                                         5.1: Working with Individuals
                                                                                                              MonteCarloSimulation
   3.4: Exercises
                                                                                                                 11.6: Web Exercise

                                                                                                              MS Excel

                                                                                                                 9.4: Software and Technology Exercise
MyersBriggs                                              partnership                                              production

   5.5: Web Exercises                                       12.2: Procurement Plan                                   10.7: Software and Technology Exercises

N                                                        path settings                                            professional ethics

negotiation                                                 4: Understanding and Meeting Client Expectations         4.2: Understanding Values and Expectations

   5.1: Working with Individuals                         path_settings                                            ProfitLoss
   5.4: Exercises
                                                            5: Working with People on Projects                       11.6: Web Exercise
network charts
                                                         payback                                                  project
   8.6: Exercises
                                                            7.7: Software and Technology Exercise                    1: Introduction to Project Management
nonprofit                                                                                                            4.6: Web Exercises
                                                         performanceTests                                            7.2: Project Scope
   InfoPage
                                                            12.5: Project Closure                                 project alignment
normal
                                                         personal health                                             7.6: Exercises
   10.7: Software and Technology Exercises
                                                            11.5: Exercises                                       project analysis
normal distribution
                                                         personaldevelopment                                         1.6: Exercises
   10.1: Quality and Statistics                                                                                      4.5: Exercises
                                                            5.5: Web Exercises                                       5.4: Exercises
North America
                                                         personality evaluation                                   project archival
   6.5: Software and Technology Exercises
                                                            3.4: Exercises                                           12.6: Exercises
nurturing satisfaction
                                                         personalityTesting                                       project attributes
   4: Understanding and Meeting Client Expectations
                                                            5.5: Web Exercises                                       2.6: Software and Technology Exercise
O
                                                         personalitytypes                                         project characteristics
objectives
                                                            5.1: Working with Individuals                            1.2: Project Defined
   4.6: Web Exercises
   7.1: Project Selection                                phasemanagement                                          project charter
   10.7: Software and Technology Exercises
                                                            4.1: Including the Client                                7.2: Project Scope
online
                                                         phonetic                                                 project closure
   1.7: Web Exercise
   4.6: Web Exercises                                       1.7: Web Exercise                                        12: Project Procurement and Closure

online catalogs                                          planned value                                            project complexity

   12.7: Web Exercises                                      9.3: Exercises                                           8.5: Project Scheduling Software
                                                                                                                     11.2: Risk Management Process
openeducation                                            planning
                                                                                                                  project cost
   InfoPage                                                 1.4: Key Skills of the Project Manager
                                                            2.2: Project Profiling Models                            1.6: Exercises
OpenProj                                                    3.1: Project Phases
                                                            8.1: Types of Schedules                               project crashing
   8.7: Software and Technology Exercises                   10: Managing Project Quality
                                                                                                                     8.6: Exercises
operational efficiency                                   PMI
                                                                                                                  project delays
   7.1: Project Selection                                   1.2: Project Defined
                                                                                                                     11.1: Defining Risk
operations management                                    PMO
                                                                                                                  project delivery
   1.3: Project Context                                     1.3: Project Context
                                                                                                                     1.1: Project Management Defined
operationsmanagement                                     postproject review
                                                                                                                  project documentation
   1.4: Key Skills of the Project Manager                   12.6: Exercises
                                                                                                                     3.1: Project Phases
organization                                             postprojectReview                                           7.5: Communications Planning
                                                                                                                     11.3: Project Risk by Phases
   7.1: Project Selection                                   12.5: Project Closure
   7.6: Exercises                                                                                                 project duration
                                                         probability
organizational knowledge                                                                                             2.2: Project Profiling Models
                                                            11.6: Web Exercise
   2.5: Exercises                                                                                                 project evaluation
                                                         problem solving
organizational management                                                                                            7.7: Software and Technology Exercise
                                                            5.3: Creating a Project Culture
   3.4: Exercises                                                                                                 project execution
                                                         problemresolution
organizational risks                                                                                                 2.2: Project Profiling Models
                                                            4.3: Dealing with Problems                               7.2: Project Scope
   11.1: Defining Risk                                                                                               8.1: Types of Schedules
                                                         process analysis
OrganizationalComplexity                                                                                          project goals
                                                            10.5: Assuring Quality
   3: Project Phases and Organization                                                                                5.2: Working with Groups and Teams
                                                         process improvement
organizationalprocess                                                                                             project initiation
                                                            1.3: Project Context
   3.5: Web Exercise                                        10.4: Planning and Controlling Project Quality           7.4: Alignment Process

OSHA certification                                       procurement

   10.5: Assuring Quality                                   3.2: Project Organization
                                                            12.1: Identifying the Need for Resources Outside the
output                                                   Organization
                                                            12.2: Procurement Plan
   1.7: Web Exercise                                        12.3: Selecting the Type of Contract
                                                            12.4: Procurement Process
outsourcing                                                 12.6: Exercises
                                                            12.7: Web Exercises
   12.1: Identifying the Need for Resources Outside the
Organization                                             procurement plan

P                                                           12: Project Procurement and Closure

parametric estimate                                      procurement process

   9.1: Estimating Costs                                    12: Project Procurement and Closure

                                                         procurementContracts

                                                            12.5: Project Closure
project management                                       project risk                                           projectapproach

   1: Introduction to Project Management                    2.6: Software and Technology Exercise                  2.1: Using a Project Profile
   1.1: Project Management Defined                          11.1: Defining Risk
   1.2: Project Defined                                     11.5: Exercises                                     projectauthority
   1.3: Project Context
   1.6: Exercises                                        project schedule                                          3.5: Web Exercise
   1.8: Software and Technology Exercises
   2.2: Project Profiling Models                            8.2: Elements of Time Management                    projectbudget
   2.5: Exercises
   2.6: Software and Technology Exercise                 project schedules                                         1.5: Introduction to the Project Management
   3.1: Project Phases                                                                                          Knowledge Areas
   3.4: Exercises                                           8.1: Types of Schedules
   4.2: Understanding Values and Expectations                                                                      2.1: Using a Project Profile
   4.5: Exercises                                        project scope                                             9.2: Managing the Budget
   5.2: Working with Groups and Teams
   6.1: Types of Communication                              1.1: Project Management Defined                     projectCelebration
   6.2: Selecting Software                                  1.2: Project Defined
   6.3: Exercises                                           1.6: Exercises                                         12.5: Project Closure
   7.2: Project Scope                                       2.2: Project Profiling Models
   7.4: Alignment Process                                   8.2: Elements of Time Management                    projectcharter
   7.5: Communications Planning                             12.3: Selecting the Type of Contract
   8.1: Types of Schedules                                                                                         3.5: Web Exercise
   8.2: Elements of Time Management                      project selection
   8.5: Project Scheduling Software                                                                             projectcomplexity
   8.6: Exercises                                           9.1: Estimating Costs
   9.1: Estimating Costs                                                                                           2.4: Darnall-Preston Complexity Index Structure
   9.3: Exercises                                        project size                                              11: Managing Project Risk
   9.4: Software and Technology Exercise
   10.4: Planning and Controlling Project Quality           2.2: Project Profiling Models                       projectcosts
   10.5: Assuring Quality
   11.2: Risk Management Process                         project success                                           1.5: Introduction to the Project Management
   11.3: Project Risk by Phases                                                                                 Knowledge Areas
   12.1: Identifying the Need for Resources Outside the     1.1: Project Management Defined
Organization                                                1.3: Project Context                                projectdeadlines
   12.2: Procurement Plan                                   2.2: Project Profiling Models
   12.3: Selecting the Type of Contract                     7.4: Alignment Process                                 4.4: Nurturing a Feeling of Satisfaction
   12.4: Procurement Process
   12.7: Web Exercises                                   project team                                           projectdevelopment

project management software                                 3.1: Project Phases                                    3.5: Web Exercise

   8.5: Project Scheduling Software                      project types                                          projectexecution

project management tools                                    2.2: Project Profiling Models                          1.5: Introduction to the Project Management
                                                                                                                Knowledge Areas
   6.1: Types of Communication                           project_control
                                                                                                                   2.1: Using a Project Profile
project manager                                             3.2: Project Organization                              2.4: Darnall-Preston Complexity Index Structure

   1: Introduction to Project Management                 project_efficiency                                     projectfunction
   1.3: Project Context
   7.1: Project Selection                                   3.2: Project Organization                              3.3: Using the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index to
   7.6: Exercises                                                                                               Measure Organizational Complexity
                                                         project_execution
project objectives                                                                                              projectgoals
                                                            7.3: Project Start-Up
   11.1: Defining Risk                                      8.4: Managing the Schedule                             5.3: Creating a Project Culture

project outcomes                                         project_initiation                                     projectleadership

   1.1: Project Management Defined                          7.3: Project Start-Up                                  4.3: Dealing with Problems

project performance                                      project_management                                     projectmanagement

   1.1: Project Management Defined                          3.2: Project Organization                              TitlePage
   5.2: Working with Groups and Teams                       7.3: Project Start-Up                                  1.4: Key Skills of the Project Manager
                                                            8.4: Managing the Schedule                             1.5: Introduction to the Project Management
project phases                                                                                                  Knowledge Areas
                                                         project_manager                                           2.1: Using a Project Profile
   1.2: Project Defined                                                                                            2.3: Complex Systems and the Darnall-Preston
   3.1: Project Phases                                      3.2: Project Organization                           Complexity Index
   8.1: Types of Schedules                                                                                         2.4: Darnall-Preston Complexity Index Structure
   8.2: Elements of Time Management                      project_organization                                      3.3: Using the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index to
   11.3: Project Risk by Phases                                                                                 Measure Organizational Complexity
                                                            3.2: Project Organization                              3.5: Web Exercise
project planning                                                                                                   4.1: Including the Client
                                                         project_planning                                          4.3: Dealing with Problems
   1.1: Project Management Defined                                                                                 4.4: Nurturing a Feeling of Satisfaction
   4.2: Understanding Values and Expectations               7.3: Project Start-Up                                  5.1: Working with Individuals
   7.2: Project Scope                                                                                              5.3: Creating a Project Culture
   8.2: Elements of Time Management                      project_procurement                                       5.5: Web Exercises
   11.2: Risk Management Process                                                                                   8.3: Critical Path and Float
                                                            3.2: Project Organization                              8.7: Software and Technology Exercises
project quality                                                                                                    9.2: Managing the Budget
                                                         project_scheduling                                        10.3: Relevance of Quality Programs to Project
   1.6: Exercises                                                                                               Quality
   10: Managing Project Quality                             7.3: Project Start-Up                                  11: Managing Project Risk
                                                                                                                   11.4: Project Risk and the Project Complexity Profile
project requirements                                     project_scheduling_software                               11.6: Web Exercise

   1.1: Project Management Defined                          8: Project Time Management                          projectmanager

                                                         project_scope                                             2.1: Using a Project Profile

                                                            7.3: Project Start-Up                               projectmonitoring
                                                            8.4: Managing the Schedule
                                                                                                                   4.4: Nurturing a Feeling of Satisfaction
                                                         project_success
                                                                                                                ProjectOrganization
                                                            3.2: Project Organization
                                                                                                                   3: Project Phases and Organization
                                                         project_team
                                                                                                                projectoversight
                                                            7.3: Project Start-Up
                                                                                                                   4.1: Including the Client
                                                         project_tools

                                                            7.3: Project Start-Up

                                                         projectactivities

                                                            3.3: Using the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index to
                                                         Measure Organizational Complexity
projectphases                                             purchasing plan                                           RFQ

   3: Project Phases and Organization                        12.2: Procurement Plan                                    12.2: Procurement Plan
   4.1: Including the Client                                                                                           12.4: Procurement Process
                                                          Q                                                            12.6: Exercises
projectplanning                                                                                                        12.7: Web Exercises
                                                          QRCode
   1.5: Introduction to the Project Management                                                                      risk
Knowledge Areas                                              TitlePage
                                                                                                                       11: Managing Project Risk
   2.3: Complex Systems and the Darnall-Preston           quality                                                      12.1: Identifying the Need for Resources Outside the
Complexity Index                                                                                                    Organization
                                                             10: Managing Project Quality
   2.4: Darnall-Preston Complexity Index Structure           10.1: Quality and Statistics                           risk analysis
   4.4: Nurturing a Feeling of Satisfaction                  10.4: Planning and Controlling Project Quality
   8.7: Software and Technology Exercises                    10.7: Software and Technology Exercises                   10.4: Planning and Controlling Project Quality
                                                             11.4: Project Risk and the Project Complexity Profile     11.2: Risk Management Process
ProjectProfile                                               12.1: Identifying the Need for Resources Outside the
                                                          Organization                                              risk assessment
   2: Project Profiling
                                                          quality assurance                                            11.1: Defining Risk
ProjectProfilingModels                                                                                                 11.2: Risk Management Process
                                                             10.1: Quality and Statistics                              11.3: Project Risk by Phases
   2: Project Profiling                                      10.5: Assuring Quality
                                                                                                                    risk identification
projectquality                                            quality audit
                                                                                                                       11.2: Risk Management Process
   1.5: Introduction to the Project Management               10.5: Assuring Quality                                    11.3: Project Risk by Phases
Knowledge Areas
                                                          quality control                                           risk management
   10.3: Relevance of Quality Programs to Project
Quality                                                      10.1: Quality and Statistics                              2.2: Project Profiling Models
                                                             10.2: Development of Quality as a Competitive             11.1: Defining Risk
projectrisk                                               Advantage                                                    11.2: Risk Management Process
                                                             10.4: Planning and Controlling Project Quality            11.3: Project Risk by Phases
   1.5: Introduction to the Project Management               10.5: Assuring Quality                                    12.3: Selecting the Type of Contract
Knowledge Areas                                                                                                        12.4: Procurement Process
                                                          quality improvement
   11: Managing Project Risk                                                                                        risk mitigation
   11.4: Project Risk and the Project Complexity Profile     10.2: Development of Quality as a Competitive
                                                          Advantage                                                    11.2: Risk Management Process
projectscenarios                                                                                                       11.3: Project Risk by Phases
                                                          quality management                                           11.5: Exercises
   3.3: Using the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index to
Measure Organizational Complexity                            10.2: Development of Quality as a Competitive          riskanalysis
                                                          Advantage
ProjectScope                                                                                                           4.3: Dealing with Problems
                                                             10.4: Planning and Controlling Project Quality            11.4: Project Risk and the Project Complexity Profile
   1.5: Introduction to the Project Management               10.5: Assuring Quality
Knowledge Areas                                              10.6: Exercises                                        riskassessment
                                                             12.4: Procurement Process
   7: Starting a Project                                                                                               11: Managing Project Risk
                                                          quality method
ProjectSelection                                                                                                    RiskEstimation
                                                             12.6: Exercises
   7: Starting a Project                                                                                               11.6: Web Exercise
                                                          quality programs
projectskills                                                                                                       RiskManagement
                                                             10: Managing Project Quality
   2.1: Using a Project Profile                                                                                        11: Managing Project Risk
                                                          qualityassurance                                             11.4: Project Risk and the Project Complexity Profile
ProjectStartUp                                                                                                         11.6: Web Exercise
                                                             8.4: Managing the Schedule
   7: Starting a Project                                     10.3: Relevance of Quality Programs to Project         riskMitigation
                                                          Quality
projectsuccess                                                                                                         12.5: Project Closure
                                                          qualitycontrol
   2.1: Using a Project Profile                                                                                     roles of managers
   2.3: Complex Systems and the Darnall-Preston              10.3: Relevance of Quality Programs to Project
Complexity Index                                          Quality                                                      3.4: Exercises
   4.1: Including the Client
   4.4: Nurturing a Feeling of Satisfaction               qualitymanagement                                         S

projectteams                                                 10.3: Relevance of Quality Programs to Project         safety risks
                                                          Quality
   4.1: Including the Client                                                                                           11.1: Defining Risk
                                                             12.5: Project Closure
projecttemplates                                                                                                    schedule
                                                          R
   3.5: Web Exercise                                                                                                   11.4: Project Risk and the Project Complexity Profile
                                                          relationships                                                12.1: Identifying the Need for Resources Outside the
projecttimemanagement                                                                                               Organization
                                                             4.6: Web Exercises
   1.5: Introduction to the Project Management                                                                      schedule performance index
Knowledge Areas                                           renewable energy
                                                                                                                       9.3: Exercises
projecttiming                                                1.2: Project Defined
                                                                                                                    schedule variance
   4.4: Nurturing a Feeling of Satisfaction               reports
                                                                                                                       9.3: Exercises
projecttools                                                 6.2: Selecting Software                                   9.4: Software and Technology Exercise

   2.1: Using a Project Profile                           request for quote                                         schedule_management

projecttracker                                               12.2: Procurement Plan                                    8.4: Managing the Schedule

   8.7: Software and Technology Exercises                 research                                                  scheduleperformanceindex

projecttracking                                              4.6: Web Exercises                                        9.2: Managing the Budget

   4.3: Dealing with Problems                             retention                                                 scheduling
   9.2: Managing the Budget
                                                             4.5: Exercises                                            8.1: Types of Schedules
projecttypes                                                                                                           8.3: Critical Path and Float
                                                          RFP
   2.1: Using a Project Profile                                                                                     scope
                                                             12.4: Procurement Process
pronunciation                                                12.6: Exercises                                           7.2: Project Scope
                                                             12.7: Web Exercises
   1.7: Web Exercise

psychologicalAssessments

   5.5: Web Exercises

public works projects

   1.2: Project Defined
scope creep                                         stakeholders                                           teamwork

   1.6: Exercises                                      2.3: Complex Systems and the Darnall-Preston           2.3: Complex Systems and the Darnall-Preston
                                                    Complexity Index                                       Complexity Index
scopedocument
                                                       2.4: Darnall-Preston Complexity Index Structure        4.3: Dealing with Problems
   3.5: Web Exercise                                   5.3: Creating a Project Culture                        4.4: Nurturing a Feeling of Satisfaction
                                                       7.1: Project Selection                                 5.1: Working with Individuals
screen capture                                                                                                5.2: Working with Groups and Teams
                                                    standard                                                  5.3: Creating a Project Culture
   1.8: Software and Technology Exercises
   6.4: Web Exercise                                   10.7: Software and Technology Exercises             techniques

selfawareness                                       Standard Deviation                                        6.5: Software and Technology Exercises

   5.1: Working with Individuals                       10.1: Quality and Statistics                        technologycomplexity

SimpleToComplex                                     standardization                                           3.3: Using the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index to
                                                                                                           Measure Organizational Complexity
   TitlePage                                           3.5: Web Exercise
                                                                                                           TechnologyExercise
SimulationTechniques                                statistical control
                                                                                                              2: Project Profiling
   11.6: Web Exercise                                  10.4: Planning and Controlling Project Quality
                                                                                                           technologyintegration
Six Sigma                                           statistical sampling
                                                                                                              InfoPage
   10.2: Development of Quality as a Competitive       10.5: Assuring Quality
Advantage                                                                                                  telephone
                                                    statistics
SixSigma                                                                                                      6.5: Software and Technology Exercises
                                                       10: Managing Project Quality
   10.3: Relevance of Quality Programs to Project      10.1: Quality and Statistics                        templates
Quality                                                10.7: Software and Technology Exercises
                                                                                                              6.2: Selecting Software
software selection                                  strategic planning                                        12.7: Web Exercises

   8.5: Project Scheduling Software                    7.1: Project Selection                              temporary projects

software_and_technology_exercises                   students                                                  1.2: Project Defined

   8: Project Time Management                          10.6: Exercises                                     textbookadaptation

SoftwareTechnologyExercise                          supplier evaluation                                       InfoPage

   7: Starting a Project                               12.4: Procurement Process                           time conversion

span of control                                     supplier relationships                                    6.4: Web Exercise

   3.4: Exercises                                      12.3: Selecting the Type of Contract                time zones

speakers                                            supplierManagement                                        6.3: Exercises
                                                                                                              6.4: Web Exercise
   1.7: Web Exercise                                   12.5: Project Closure
                                                                                                           total quality management
SPI                                                 suppliers
                                                                                                              1.3: Project Context
   9.4: Software and Technology Exercise               12.2: Procurement Plan
                                                                                                           totalfloat
spreadsheet                                         synchronous
                                                                                                              8.3: Critical Path and Float
   7.7: Software and Technology Exercise               6.3: Exercises
                                                                                                           TQM
spreadsheet software                                synchronous communication
                                                                                                              10.2: Development of Quality as a Competitive
   8.6: Exercises                                      6.1: Types of Communication                         Advantage

stakeholder                                         systems theory                                            10.3: Relevance of Quality Programs to Project
                                                                                                           Quality
   7.2: Project Scope                                  2.3: Complex Systems and the Darnall-Preston
                                                    Complexity Index                                          10.6: Exercises
stakeholder agreement
                                                    T                                                      tracking_progress
   2.6: Software and Technology Exercise
                                                    task management                                           8.4: Managing the Schedule
stakeholder alignment
                                                       9.4: Software and Technology Exercise               training
   3.1: Project Phases
                                                    taskmanagement                                            1.4: Key Skills of the Project Manager
stakeholder engagement                                                                                        7.2: Project Scope
                                                       8.7: Software and Technology Exercises
   1.3: Project Context                                                                                    training evaluation
   4.2: Understanding Values and Expectations       team collaboration
   5.2: Working with Groups and Teams                                                                         10.5: Assuring Quality
   7.4: Alignment Process                              6.1: Types of Communication
   7.5: Communications Planning                        7.4: Alignment Process                              trust
   11.2: Risk Management Process                       7.5: Communications Planning
                                                                                                              5.2: Working with Groups and Teams
stakeholder relationships                           team communication
                                                                                                           trust development
   11.3: Project Risk by Phases                        6.1: Types of Communication
                                                                                                              7.4: Alignment Process
stakeholder_communication                           team dynamics
                                                                                                           types_of_schedules
   8.4: Managing the Schedule                          3.4: Exercises
                                                       5.2: Working with Groups and Teams                     8: Project Time Management
stakeholder_relationships
                                                    teambuilding                                           U                                Client  Expectations
   7.3: Project Start-Up
                                                       1.4: Key Skills of the Project Manager              understanding
stakeholderagreement
                                                    teamcollaboration                                         4.5: Exercises
   2.4: Darnall-Preston Complexity Index Structure
                                                       4.1: Including the Client                           understanding values
stakeholderalignment
                                                    teamfamiliarity                                           4: Understanding and Meeting
   1.5: Introduction to the Project Management
Knowledge Areas                                        3.3: Using the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index to  unique deliverables
                                                    Measure Organizational Complexity
stakeholdercommunication                                                                                      1.2: Project Defined
                                                    teams
   9.2: Managing the Budget                                                                                unknown risks
                                                       5: Working with People on Projects
stakeholderinvolvement                                                                                        11.1: Defining Risk
                                                                                                              11.5: Exercises
   4.3: Dealing with Problems
URL                                          vendors                                              web_exercises

   Licensing                                    12.2: Procurement Plan                               5: Working with People on Projects

user guide                                   virtual team                                         webexercise

   1.8: Software and Technology Exercises       6.3: Exercises                                       3: Project Phases and Organization
                                                                                                     11: Managing Project Risk
V                                 Exercises  virtual teams
                                                                                                  work breakdown structure
variation                                       6.1: Types of Communication
                                                                                                     8.2: Elements of Time Management
   10.7: Software and Technology             vocabulary
                                                                                                  workflow organization
vendor bid analysis                             1.7: Web Exercise
                                                                                                     7.4: Alignment Process
   9.1: Estimating Costs                     W
                                                                                                  working_with_groups
vendor relationship                          WBS
                                                                                                     5: Working with People on Projects
   3.2: Project Organization                    8.7: Software and Technology Exercises
                                                                                                  working_with_individuals
vendor relationships                         web browser
                                                                                                     5: Working with People on Projects
   12.7: Web Exercises                          1.8: Software and Technology Exercises
                                                                                                  workload distribution
vendor selection                             web exercises
                                                                                                     8.6: Exercises
   12.4: Procurement Process                    4: Understanding and Meeting Client Expectations
                                                12: Project Procurement and Closure               world time zone map

                                                                                                     6.4: Web Exercise
Glossary                                               closeout phase | Shutting down the project,               cost reimbursable contract with a fixed fee |

68-95-99.7 rule | Approximate percentages of           including transferring staff, closing offices, archiving  A contract that reimburses the contractor for costs, but
                                                       documents, and finishing punch list items.                the profit is a fixed amount.
measurements that are within one, two, and three
standard deviations of the mean.                       closeout phase | Shutting down the project,               cost reimbursable contract with a fixed fee |

actual cost (AC) | Sum of money spent so far.          including transferring staff, closing offices, archiving  A contract that reimburses the contractor for costs, but
adaptive systems | Organization of elements that       documents, and finishing punch list items.                the profit is a fixed amount.

change in response to events in their environment.     communication matrix | Table that displays the            cost reimbursable contract with a
                                                                                                                 percentage fee | A contract that reimburses the
alignment process | Developing a common                responsibilities and distribution for each type of
                                                       document or information.                                  contractor for costs, but the profit is a fixed amount.
understanding among the key stakeholders of the
purpose and goals of the project and the means and     communication matrix | Table that displays the            cost reimbursable contract with a
methods of accomplishing those goals.                                                                            percentage fee | A contract that reimburses the
                                                       responsibilities and distribution for each type of
analogous estimate | Budget estimate based on a        document or information.                                  contractor for costs, but the profit is a fixed amount.

similar project.                                       conceptual estimate | Initial cost estimate made          cost reimbursable contract with an
                                                                                                                 incentive fee | A cost reimbursable contract that
analogous estimate | Budget estimate based on a        with partial knowledge. Also called a ballpark
                                                       estimate.                                                 includes an additional incentive payment if the
similar project.                                                                                                 contractor reduces costs below a target amount or
                                                       conceptual estimate | Initial cost estimate made          completes the work ahead of schedule.
asynchronous | Not synchronous; communication
                                                       with partial knowledge. Also called a ballpark            cost reimbursable contract with an
between parties does not take place at the same time.  estimate.                                                 incentive fee | A cost reimbursable contract that

asynchronous | Not synchronous; communication          contingency reserves | Money held to pay for              includes an additional incentive payment if the
                                                                                                                 contractor reduces costs below a target amount or
between parties does not take place at the same time.  predictable but unspecified extra costs.                  completes the work ahead of schedule.

attributes | Characteristic of an entity or object.    contingency reserves | Money held to pay for              cost variance (CV) | Earned value minus actual
attributes | Characteristic of an entity or object.
attributes | Characteristic of an entity or object.    predictable but unspecified extra costs.                  cost.
attributes | Characteristic of an entity or object.
benchmarking | Comparison of practices to              contingency time | Additional time added to the           cost variance (CV) | Earned value minus actual

standards or best practices in the same industry.      schedule that can be used if a scheduled activity         cost.
                                                       exceeds its estimated duration.
benchmarking | Comparison of practices to                                                                        crashing | Accelerating the project schedule.
                                                       contingency time | Additional time added to the           crashing | Accelerating the project schedule.
standards or best practices in the same industry.                                                                critical path | Sequence of activities through the
                                                       schedule that can be used if a scheduled activity
bid | An offer to provide something of value for       exceeds its estimated duration.                           network that results in the latest completion date of the
                                                                                                                 project.
compensation. A bid can be written or verbal and can   contract | An agreement that is legally enforceable.
be in response to a solicitation or unsolicited.       contract | An agreement that is legally enforceable.      critical path | Sequence of activities through the
                                                       contracting plan | Defines the relationship
bid | An offer to provide something of value for                                                                 network that results in the latest completion date of the
                                                       between the project and the subcontractors--supplier,     project.
compensation. A bid can be written or verbal and can   vendor, or partner--and also defines a process for
be in response to a solicitation or unsolicited.       making changes in the agreement.                          current schedule | An updated schedule that show

bottom-up estimating | Summing of estimates of         contracting plan | Defines the relationship               the present status of the project.

each detail of the activity and project.               between the project and the subcontractors--supplier,     current schedule | An updated schedule that show
                                                       vendor, or partner--and also defines a process for
bottom-up estimating | Summing of estimates of         making changes in the agreement.                          the present status of the project.

each detail of the activity and project.               control limits | Upper and lower extremes of              D&B | A company that is also known as Dun and

budget at completion (BAC) | Budget for the            allowable variation.                                      Bradstreet. It provides information that may be useful
                                                                                                                 in evaluating financial stability of bidders.
entire project.                                        control limits | Upper and lower extremes of
                                                                                                                 D&B | A company that is also known as Dun and
budget at completion (BAC) | Budget for the            allowable variation.
                                                                                                                 Bradstreet. It provides information that may be useful
entire project.                                        cost aggregation | Sum of component costs.                in evaluating financial stability of bidders.
                                                       cost aggregation | Sum of component costs.
cash flow | The movement of money where income         cost of quality (COQ) | Total cost of efforts to          Darnall-Preston Complexity Index
                                                                                                                 (DPCITM) | Project profiling system that groups
is positive and spending is negative.                  improve quality plus the cost of failure.
                                                                                                                 project attributes into four categories: internal
cash flow | The movement of money where income         cost of quality (COQ) | Total cost of efforts to          attributes, external attributes, technological
                                                                                                                 complexity, and ecological attributes.
is positive and spending is negative.                  improve quality plus the cost of failure.
                                                                                                                 Darnall-Preston Complexity Index
central limit theorem | Idea that if variation is      cost performance index (CPI) | Ratio of earned            (DPCITM) | Project profiling system that groups

caused by several random factors, they will generally  value (EV) to actual cost (AC).                           project attributes into four categories: internal
cancel each other out and most measurements will be                                                              attributes, external attributes, technological
near the middle of the range of variation.             cost performance index (CPI) | Ratio of earned            complexity, and ecological attributes.

central limit theorem | Idea that if variation is      value (EV) to actual cost (AC).                           decomposed | Separated into basic elements.
                                                                                                                 decomposed | Separated into basic elements.
caused by several random factors, they will generally  cost plus contracts | A contract that covers all          Deming prize | Award for quality in Japan named
cancel each other out and most measurements will be
near the middle of the range of variation.             allowable expenses and pays the contractor for all        after W. Edwards Deming, an American.
                                                       allowable costs with an additional amount to cover the
change management process | Method of                  contractor's fee. The fee can be either a percent or an   Deming prize | Award for quality in Japan named
                                                       amount.
incorporating change into project planning and                                                                   after W. Edwards Deming, an American.
execution processes.                                   cost plus contracts | A contract that covers all
                                                                                                                 DISC | Acronym for a personality assessment tool,
change management process | Method of                  allowable expenses and pays the contractor for all
                                                       allowable costs with an additional amount to cover the    where DISC stands for dominance, influence,
incorporating change into project planning and         contractor's fee. The fee can be either a percent or an   steadiness, and conscientiousness.
execution processes.                                   amount.

chartering organization | Group that determines

the need for the project.

                                                       1                                                         https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/54129
DISC | Acronym for a personality assessment tool,         filtered | Display is restricted to data that meets         Gantt chart | Bar chart used to indicate duration

where DISC stands for dominance, influence,               criteria.                                                   and relationships between project activities.
steadiness, and conscientiousness.
                                                          filtered | Display is restricted to data that meets         Gantt chart | Bar chart used to indicate duration
early start (ES) dates | The soonest date an
                                                          criteria.                                                   and relationships between project activities.
activity can begin determined by the project start date
and the durations of its predecessor activities.          finish-finish | Concurrent activities end at the same       grade | Category of product or service requirements.
                                                                                                                      grade | Category of product or service requirements.
early start (ES) dates | The soonest date an              time.                                                       Group 3 fax machine | Model of fax machine that

activity can begin determined by the project start date   finish-finish | Concurrent activities end at the same       uses digital scanning and data compression.
and the durations of its predecessor activities.
                                                          time.                                                       Group 3 fax machine | Model of fax machine that
earned value (EV) | Sum of budgeted expenses up
                                                          finish-start | Sequence of activities where the first       uses digital scanning and data compression.
to a particular point in the schedule.
                                                          activity must end before the next activity can begin.       hierarchical | Classified according to criteria into
earned value (EV) | Sum of budgeted expenses up
                                                          finish-start | Sequence of activities where the first       successive levels.
to a particular point in the schedule.
                                                          activity must end before the next activity can begin.       hierarchical | Classified according to criteria into
earned value management (EVM) | Method of
                                                          fishbone diagram | Graphic representation of the            successive levels.
comparing the budgeted and actual costs of a project
during the project.                                       contributing causes of a quality problem.                   histogram | Column chart that displays frequency of

earned value management (EVM) | Method of                 fishbone diagram | Graphic representation of the            occurrence on the vertical axis.

comparing the budgeted and actual costs of a project      contributing causes of a quality problem.                   histogram | Column chart that displays frequency of
during the project.
                                                          fixed price contract | A type of contract that pays         occurrence on the vertical axis.
emotional intelligence quotient (EQ) | Ability
                                                          a contractor an amount that is agreed upon at the start     Humm Factor | Qualitative project measurement
to sense, understand, and effectively apply the power     of the project.
and acumens of emotions.                                                                                              tool developed by Russ Darnall.
                                                          fixed price contract | A type of contract that pays
emotional intelligence quotient (EQ) | Ability                                                                        Humm Factor | Qualitative project measurement
                                                          a contractor an amount that is agreed upon at the start
to sense, understand, and effectively apply the power     of the project.                                             tool developed by Russ Darnall.
and acumens of emotions.
                                                          fixed price contract with price adjustment |                inference | Process of deriving conclusions based on
encryption | Replacing readable content with a
                                                          The service provider is allowed an adjustment for           assumptions.
code.                                                     economic changes that affect costs such as changes in
                                                          currency values or inflation.                               inference | Process of deriving conclusions based on
encryption | Replacing readable content with a
                                                          fixed price contract with price adjustment |                assumptions.
code.
                                                          The service provider is allowed an adjustment for           initiation phase | Activities associated with starting
estimate at completion (EAC) | Revised project            economic changes that affect costs such as changes in
                                                          currency values or inflation.                               the project.
budget based on actual cost to date plus the estimate to
complete (ETC).                                           Fixed price with incentive fee | A contract type            initiation phase | Activities associated with starting

estimate at completion (EAC) | Revised project            that provides an incentive for performing on the            the project.
                                                          project above the established baseline in the contract.
budget based on actual cost to date plus the estimate to                                                              interest | Charge for a loan.
complete (ETC).                                           Fixed price with incentive fee | A contract type            interest | Charge for a loan.
                                                                                                                      internal rate of return (IRR) | Average annual
estimate to complete (ETC) | Estimate of the              that provides an incentive for performing on the
                                                          project above the established baseline in the contract.     return on an investment that earns or saves money.
amount of money needed to complete the unfinished
part of the project.                                      fixed total cost contract | The service provider is         internal rate of return (IRR) | Average annual

estimate to complete (ETC) | Estimate of the              responsible for incorporating all costs, including profit,  return on an investment that earns or saves money.
                                                          into the agreed-on price.
amount of money needed to complete the unfinished                                                                     International              Organization         for
part of the project.                                      fixed total cost contract | The service provider is         Standardization (ISO) | Degree to which a set of
                                                                                                                      inherent characteristics fulfill requirements.
execution phase | Carrying out the planned work.          responsible for incorporating all costs, including profit,
execution phase | Carrying out the planned work.          into the agreed-on price.                                   International              Organization         for
expedite | The work processes associated with                                                                         Standardization (ISO) | Degree to which a set of
                                                          fixed unit price contract | A contract based on an          inherent characteristics fulfill requirements.
shortening the time of delivering a product or service.
                                                          agreed-on unit price for services or materials if the       key supplier | A person or organization supplying
expedite | The work processes associated with             amount needed is not known accurately.
                                                                                                                      goods or services to the project that has a special
shortening the time of delivering a product or service.   fixed unit price contract | A contract based on an          relationship with the project or parent organization and
                                                                                                                      might bypass the bidding process.
Expediting | The work processes associated with           agreed-on unit price for services or materials if the
                                                          amount needed is not known accurately.                      key supplier | A person or organization supplying
shortening the time of delivering a product or service.
                                                          Float | The amount of time an activity can be delayed       goods or services to the project that has a special
Expediting | The work processes associated with                                                                       relationship with the project or parent organization and
                                                          from an early start without delaying the completion         might bypass the bidding process.
shortening the time of delivering a product or service.   date.
                                                                                                                      known risks | Risks that can be anticipated, such as
extensible markup language (XML) | Rules                  Float | The amount of time an activity can be delayed
                                                                                                                      exceptionally bad weather.
for defining tags that can identify text as data or for   from an early start without delaying the completion
display purposes.                                         date.                                                       known risks | Risks that can be anticipated, such as

extensible markup language (XML) | Rules                  flowchart | Diagram of processes that have branches         exceptionally bad weather.

for defining tags that can identify text as data or for   and loops based on decisions.                               lag time | Amount of time that must separate the
display purposes.
                                                          flowchart | Diagram of processes that have branches         finish of one activity and the start of the next
facsimile | A duplicate (see telefacsimile).                                                                          sequential activity.
facsimile | A duplicate (see telefacsimile).              and loops based on decisions.
Fairness | Impartial and honest treatment that is free                                                                lag time | Amount of time that must separate the
                                                          free float | The time an activity that is not on the
from self-interest, prejudice, or favoritism.                                                                         finish of one activity and the start of the next
                                                          critical path can be delayed without delaying the start     sequential activity.
Fairness | Impartial and honest treatment that is free    of a successor activity.
                                                                                                                      lead | Leader of a group.
from self-interest, prejudice, or favoritism.             free float | The time an activity that is not on the

                                                          critical path can be delayed without delaying the start
                                                          of a successor activity.

                                                                                                                      lead | Leader of a group.

                                                          2                                                           https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/54129
lead time | Amount of time that the start of the next      normal distribution | Frequency distribution that          project | A temporary activity undertaken to create a

activity can overlap the finish of its predecessor.        looks like a bell and is the result of offsetting random   product, service, or result that is unique.
                                                           variations.
lead time | Amount of time that the start of the next                                                                 project | A temporary activity undertaken to create a
                                                           normal distribution | Frequency distribution that
activity can overlap the finish of its predecessor.                                                                   product, service, or result that is unique.
                                                           looks like a bell and is the result of offsetting random
logistics | Managing procurement, distribution,            variations.                                                project champion | Influential person who is

maintenance, and replacement of goods and services.        objective | An end toward which effort is directed         willing to use his or her influence to help the project
                                                                                                                      succeed.
logistics | Managing procurement, distribution,            that has a measurable outcome.
                                                                                                                      project champion | Influential person who is
maintenance, and replacement of goods and services.        objective | An end toward which effort is directed
                                                                                                                      willing to use his or her influence to help the project
long lead items | Equipment or materials that will         that has a measurable outcome.                             succeed.

require a long time to acquire or build.                   open source | Available at no cost for individual          project controls | Planning function and the

long lead items | Equipment or materials that will         users and with fewer restrictions than proprietary         function that tracks progress against the plan.
                                                           software.
require a long time to acquire or build.                                                                              project controls | Planning function and the
                                                           open source | Available at no cost for individual
Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award |                                                                             function that tracks progress against the plan.
                                                           users and with fewer restrictions than proprietary
U.S. award for quality named after a former secretary      software.                                                  project execution plan | Defines how the work
of commerce.
                                                           organizational risks | Possible loss that is               will be accomplished.
Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award |
                                                           associated with the business purpose of the project.       project execution plan | Defines how the work
U.S. award for quality named after a former secretary
of commerce.                                               organizational risks | Possible loss that is               will be accomplished.

management reserves | Money that is available              associated with the business purpose of the project.       project logic diagram | A graphic with boxes that

for changing the scope of the project.                     outsourced | Services or products provided by              represent tasks and their durations with connecting
                                                                                                                      arrows to indicate their sequence relationships with
management reserves | Money that is available              another company.                                           other tasks.

for changing the scope of the project.                     outsourced | Services or products provided by              project logic diagram | A graphic with boxes that

master schedule | Schedule with key dates and              another company.                                           represent tasks and their durations with connecting
                                                                                                                      arrows to indicate their sequence relationships with
activities.                                                parametric estimates | Estimates that are                  other tasks.

milestone | An important point in a project without        calculated by multiplying measured parameters by           Project Management Institute (PMI) |
                                                           cost-per-unit values.
duration or resources.                                                                                                Organization of professional project managers that
                                                           parametric estimates | Estimates that are                  publishes A Guide to the Project Management Body of
milestone | An important point in a project without                                                                   Knowledge (PMBOK Guide).
                                                           calculated by multiplying measured parameters by
duration or resources.                                     cost-per-unit values.                                      Project Management Institute (PMI) |

milestone schedule | Establishes key dates                 Pareto chart | Column chart that shows frequency           Organization of professional project managers that
                                                                                                                      publishes A Guide to the Project Management Body of
throughout the life of a project that must be met for the  on the vertical axis sorted from largest to smallest with  Knowledge (PMBOK Guide).
project to finish on time.                                 a line that shows the cumulative total.
                                                                                                                      Project management offices (PMOs) | Group
milestone schedule | Establishes key dates                 Pareto chart | Column chart that shows frequency
                                                                                                                      within an organization that manages the organization's
throughout the life of a project that must be met for the  on the vertical axis sorted from largest to smallest with  projects.
project to finish on time.                                 a line that shows the cumulative total.
                                                                                                                      Project management offices (PMOs) | Group
Miryokuteki hinshitsu | Japanese concept that              partnership | Formal arrangement to execute the
                                                                                                                      within an organization that manages the organization's
things should have an aesthetic quality and be pleasing    project with each party contributing resources.            projects.
to use (see total quality management).
                                                           partnership | Formal arrangement to execute the            project network diagram | Graphic
Miryokuteki hinshitsu | Japanese concept that
                                                           project with each party contributing resources.            representation of the sequencing of project activities.
things should have an aesthetic quality and be pleasing
to use (see total quality management).                     personal digital assistants (PDAs) | Device                project network diagram | Graphic

mission | Statement of the purpose of an                   that holds a calendar, a contact list, a task list, and    representation of the sequencing of project activities.
                                                           other support programs.
organization.                                                                                                         Project profiling | Process of extracting a
                                                           personal digital assistants (PDAs) | Device
mission | Statement of the purpose of an                                                                              characterization from the known attributes of a project.
                                                           that holds a calendar, a contact list, a task list, and
organization.                                              other support programs.                                    Project profiling | Process of extracting a

Monte Carlo simulation | A simulation that uses            planned value (PV) | Sum of the items in the               characterization from the known attributes of a project.

statistical processes to evaluate risk.                    budgeted cost of work scheduled that should have been      project scope | Document that reflects the
                                                           spent by a particular day.
Monte Carlo simulation | A simulation that uses                                                                       performance specifications of the project deliverables.
                                                           planned value (PV) | Sum of the items in the               See scope of work (SOW).
statistical processes to evaluate risk.
                                                           budgeted cost of work scheduled that should have been      project scope | Document that reflects the
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) |                       spent by a particular day.
                                                                                                                      performance specifications of the project deliverables.
Personality assessment tool that uses four pairs of        planning phase | Developing detailed schedules;            See scope of work (SOW).
letters: E-I, S-N, T-F, and J-P.
                                                           plans for staffing, procurement, and project controls;     qualified | Meets a standard of reliability and
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) |                       and a budget.
                                                                                                                      capability.
Personality assessment tool that uses four pairs of        planning phase | Developing detailed schedules;
letters: E-I, S-N, T-F, and J-P.                                                                                      qualified | Meets a standard of reliability and
                                                           plans for staffing, procurement, and project controls;
negative float | The amount by which the early             and a budget.                                              capability.

completion date exceeds the project completion date.       positive correlation | Two variables that respond          qualitative | Comparison of qualities.
                                                                                                                      qualitative | Comparison of qualities.
negative float | The amount by which the early             in the same way to change in their environment.            quality audit | Review of the quality plan,

completion date exceeds the project completion date.       positive correlation | Two variables that respond          procedures, data collection, and analysis by an outside
                                                                                                                      group.
next question | Refers to asking additional                in the same way to change in their environment.

questions to reveal hidden expectations.                   procurement | Obtaining goods and services from

next question | Refers to asking additional                providers outside the organization.

questions to reveal hidden expectations.

                                                           3                                                          https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/54129
quality audit | Review of the quality plan,              Risk reduction | Investment of funds to reduce the         solicitation | Process of requesting a price and

procedures, data collection, and analysis by an outside  risk on a project.                                         supporting information from bidders.
group.
                                                         Risk sharing | Partnering with others to share             solicitation | Process of requesting a price and
Really Simple Syndication (RSS) |
                                                         responsibility for the risk activities.                    supporting information from bidders.
Communications technology that allows news to be
sent to a computer screen.                               Risk sharing | Partnering with others to share             span of control | The number of people reporting

Really Simple Syndication (RSS) |                        responsibility for the risk activities.                    to a manager.

Communications technology that allows news to be         Risk transfer | Risk transfer is the risk mitigation       span of control | The number of people reporting
sent to a computer screen.
                                                         process of shifting the possible negative impact of an     to a manager.
reconciliation | Matching funds provided with            event to a party outside the project.
                                                                                                                    spreadsheet | Display of data in row and column
funds spent.                                             Risk transfer | Risk transfer is the risk mitigation
                                                                                                                    format.
reconciliation | Matching funds provided with            process of shifting the possible negative impact of an
                                                         event to a party outside the project.                      spreadsheet | Display of data in row and column
funds spent.
                                                         rolled up | Subtotaled.                                    format.
relationship dependence | Activities that are            rolled up | Subtotaled.
                                                         rough order of magnitude (ROM) | Cost                      standard deviation | A type of average that takes
affected by events that change the characteristics of
other activities.                                        estimate based on partial knowledge and past               into account positive and negative values where a
                                                         experience that is usually more accurate than the initial  sample is used instead of all the measurements. To
relationship dependence | Activities that are            conceptual estimate.                                       calculate the standard deviation, first the difference
                                                                                                                    between each value and the mean is squared. The
affected by events that change the characteristics of    rough order of magnitude (ROM) | Cost                      squared values are summed and divided by the number
other activities.                                                                                                   of values minus one. The square root of this value is
                                                         estimate based on partial knowledge and past               the standard deviation, also known as the Sample
request for proposal (RFP) | Requires a bidder           experience that is usually more accurate than the initial  Standard Deviation.
                                                         conceptual estimate.
to offer solutions and ideas on how to perform the                                                                  standard deviation | A type of average that takes
scope of work and a price for performing that work.      run chart | Chart of measurements that shows
                                                                                                                    into account positive and negative values where a
request for proposal (RFP) | Requires a bidder           variations as the process progresses in time.              sample is used instead of all the measurements. To
                                                                                                                    calculate the standard deviation, first the difference
to offer solutions and ideas on how to perform the       run chart | Chart of measurements that shows               between each value and the mean is squared. The
scope of work and a price for performing that work.                                                                 squared values are summed and divided by the number
                                                         variations as the process progresses in time.              of values minus one. The square root of this value is
resource calendar | Calendar that indicates                                                                         the standard deviation, also known as the Sample
                                                         scaled | Multiplied by an adjustment factor to make        Standard Deviation.
working days and days off for a group or individual.
                                                         the new estimate proportional to the original.             step changes | Significant rather than incremental
resource calendar | Calendar that indicates
                                                         scaled | Multiplied by an adjustment factor to make        improvements in effectiveness or efficiency that take
working days and days off for a group or individual.                                                                advantage of new technologies.
                                                         the new estimate proportional to the original.
resource leveling | Distributing work load to                                                                       step changes | Significant rather than incremental
                                                         schedule performance index (SPI) | Ratio of
reduce uneven concentrations of work.                                                                               improvements in effectiveness or efficiency that take
                                                         earned value (EV) to planned value (PV).                   advantage of new technologies.
resource leveling | Distributing work load to
                                                         schedule performance index (SPI) | Ratio of                style | Combination of formatting, including font,
reduce uneven concentrations of work.
                                                         earned value (EV) to planned value (PV).                   font size, font color, shading, and other attributes used
responsibility matrix | Table of people and types                                                                   to display a segment of text and to identify its level of
                                                         schedule variance (SV) | Difference between the            importance.
of problems that might require decisions.
                                                         earned value (EV) and the planned value (PV).              style | Combination of formatting, including font,
responsibility matrix | Table of people and types
                                                         schedule variance (SV) | Difference between the            font size, font color, shading, and other attributes used
of problems that might require decisions.                                                                           to display a segment of text and to identify its level of
                                                         earned value (EV) and the planned value (PV).              importance.
risk averse | A project manager or decision maker
                                                         scope change log | Sequential list of scope change         successors | Activity that comes afterward.
who avoids taking risks.                                                                                            successors | Activity that comes afterward.
                                                         requests and actions related to scope changes.             suppliers | Source of commodities.
risk averse | A project manager or decision maker                                                                   suppliers | Source of commodities.
                                                         scope change log | Sequential list of scope change         table | Group of data that is organized in rows and
who avoids taking risks.
                                                         requests and actions related to scope changes.             columns, where columns are types of data and rows
Risk avoidance | Changing the project plan to                                                                       are individual instances.
                                                         scope creep | Incremental expansion in the project
eliminate a risk.                                                                                                   table | Group of data that is organized in rows and
                                                         scope without formal approval.
Risk avoidance | Changing the project plan to                                                                       columns, where columns are types of data and rows
                                                         scope creep | Incremental expansion in the project         are individual instances.
eliminate a risk.
                                                         scope without formal approval.                             template | An example document that uses standard
risk breakdown structure (RBS) |
                                                         scope document | Written description of what               design features that can be completed to create similar
Organization of risks associated with each activity in                                                              documents.
the work breakdown structure using a similar graphic     activities are included in the project and some of those
approach.                                                that are specifically not included.                        template | An example document that uses standard

risk breakdown structure (RBS) |                         scope document | Written description of what               design features that can be completed to create similar
                                                                                                                    documents.
Organization of risks associated with each activity in   activities are included in the project and some of those
the work breakdown structure using a similar graphic     that are specifically not included.                        time and materials (T&M) | A contract used on
approach.
                                                         simple payback | Time period it takes to recoup the        small jobs with a high degree of uncertainty in which
risk events | Possible occurrence that may have a                                                                   the contractor might charge an hourly rate for labor,
                                                         original expense without considering interest payments     plus the cost of materials, plus a percentage of the total
negative impact on the project.                          or other complicating factors.                             costs.

risk events | Possible occurrence that may have a        simple payback | Time period it takes to recoup the

negative impact on the project.                          original expense without considering interest payments
                                                         or other complicating factors.
Risk management | Identification, evaluation, and
                                                         slack | Difference between the estimated time and
mitigation of risk.
                                                         project completion date (see float).
Risk management | Identification, evaluation, and
                                                         slack | Difference between the estimated time and
mitigation of risk.
                                                         project completion date (see float).
Risk reduction | Investment of funds to reduce the

risk on a project.

                                                         4                                                          https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/54129
time and materials (T&M) | A contract used on               two-week plans | The most detailed version or          Vendors | Company that designs goods or services to

small jobs with a high degree of uncertainty in which       portion of the schedule that is developed a few weeks  meet specified needs.
the contractor might charge an hourly rate for labor,       prior to the execution of those activities.
plus the cost of materials, plus a percentage of the total                                                         Vendors | Provider of products or services.
costs.                                                      typology | Classification or profiling of items that   Vendors | Provider of products or services.
                                                                                                                   virtual teams | Group that uses electronic methods
tolerance | Variation allowed on either side of the         have characteristics or traits in common.
                                                                                                                   of communicating without face-to-face meetings.
mean, often shown with the  symbol to mean plus or         typology | Classification or profiling of items that
minus.                                                                                                             virtual teams | Group that uses electronic methods
                                                            have characteristics or traits in common.
tolerance | Variation allowed on either side of the                                                                of communicating without face-to-face meetings.
                                                            UCC filings | Standardized financial disclosure
mean, often shown with the  symbol to mean plus or                                                                Web log | Online personal journal.
minus.                                                      documents that conform to the uniform commercial       Web log | Online personal journal.
                                                            code (UCC).                                            work breakdown structure (WBS) | Layered
total quality management (TQM) | Philosophy
                                                            UCC filings | Standardized financial disclosure        description of the work with increasing detail in each
of managing quality adapted from a Japanese method                                                                 layer.
that includes kaizen, atarimae hinshitsu, kansei, and       documents that conform to the uniform commercial
miryokuteki hinshitsu.                                      code (UCC).                                            work breakdown structure (WBS) | Layered

total quality management (TQM) | Philosophy                 Universal Time (UT) | Time zone system that is         description of the work with increasing detail in each
                                                                                                                   layer.
of managing quality adapted from a Japanese method          compatible with GMT but without the historical
that includes kaizen, atarimae hinshitsu, kansei, and       reference.                                             World Trade Organization (WTO) |
miryokuteki hinshitsu.
                                                            Universal Time (UT) | Time zone system that is         Negotiating forum for improving trade relationships
two-week plans | The most detailed version or                                                                      between countries.
                                                            compatible with GMT but without the historical
portion of the schedule that is developed a few weeks       reference.                                             World Trade Organization (WTO) |
prior to the execution of those activities.
                                                            Vendors | Company that designs goods or services to    Negotiating forum for improving trade relationships
                                                                                                                   between countries.
                                                            meet specified needs.

                                                            5                                                      https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/54129
Detailed Licensing                                                     3.3: Using the Darnall-Preston Complexity Index to
                                                                       Measure Organizational Complexity - CC BY-NC-SA
Overview                                                               4.0
                                                                       3.4: Exercises - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
Title: Project Management from Simple to Complex                       3.5: Web Exercise - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
                                                                   4: Understanding and Meeting Client Expectations - CC
Webpages: 95                                                       BY-NC-SA 4.0

Applicable Restrictions: Noncommercial                                 4.1: Including the Client - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
                                                                       4.2: Understanding Values and Expectations - CC BY-
All licenses found:                                                    NC-SA 4.0
                                                                       4.3: Dealing with Problems - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
    CC BY-NC-SA 4.0: 89.5% (85 pages)                                  4.4: Nurturing a Feeling of Satisfaction - CC BY-NC-
    Undeclared: 9.5% (9 pages)                                         SA 4.0
    CC BY-NC-SA 3.0: 1.1% (1 page)                                     4.5: Exercises - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
                                                                       4.6: Web Exercises - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
By Page
                                                                   5: Working with People on Projects - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
    Project Management from Simple to Complex - CC BY-NC-
    SA 3.0                                                             5.1: Working with Individuals - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
                                                                       5.2: Working with Groups and Teams - CC BY-NC-SA
        Front Matter - Undeclared                                      4.0
            TitlePage - Undeclared                                     5.3: Creating a Project Culture - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
            InfoPage - Undeclared                                      5.4: Exercises - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
            Table of Contents - Undeclared                             5.5: Web Exercises - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
            Licensing - Undeclared
                                                                   6: Communication Technologies - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
        1: Introduction to Project Management - CC BY-NC-SA
        4.0                                                            6.1: Types of Communication - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
                                                                       6.2: Selecting Software - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
            1.1: Project Management Defined - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0          6.3: Exercises - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
            1.2: Project Defined - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0                     6.4: Web Exercise - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
            1.3: Project Context - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0                     6.5: Software and Technology Exercises - CC BY-NC-
            1.4: Key Skills of the Project Manager - CC BY-NC-         SA 4.0
            SA 4.0
            1.5: Introduction to the Project Management            7: Starting a Project - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
            Knowledge Areas - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
            1.6: Exercises - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0                           7.1: Project Selection - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
            1.7: Web Exercise - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0                        7.2: Project Scope - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
            1.8: Software and Technology Exercises - CC BY-NC-         7.3: Project Start-Up - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
            SA 4.0                                                     7.4: Alignment Process - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
        2: Project Profiling - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
            2.1: Using a Project Profile - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
            2.2: Project Profiling Models - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
            2.3: Complex Systems and the Darnall-Preston
            Complexity Index - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
            2.4: Darnall-Preston Complexity Index Structure -
            CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
            2.5: Exercises - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
            2.6: Software and Technology Exercise - CC BY-NC-
            SA 4.0
        3: Project Phases and Organization - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
            3.1: Project Phases - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
            3.2: Project Organization - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

                                                                1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/95277
    7.5: Communications Planning - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0              10.5: Assuring Quality - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
    7.6: Exercises - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0                            10.6: Exercises - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
    7.7: Software and Technology Exercise - CC BY-NC-           10.7: Software and Technology Exercises - CC BY-
    SA 4.0                                                      NC-SA 4.0
8: Project Time Management - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0                11: Managing Project Risk - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

    8.1: Types of Schedules - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0                   11.1: Defining Risk - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
    8.2: Elements of Time Management - CC BY-NC-SA              11.2: Risk Management Process - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
    4.0                                                         11.3: Project Risk by Phases - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
    8.3: Critical Path and Float - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0              11.4: Project Risk and the Project Complexity Profile
    8.4: Managing the Schedule - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0                - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
    8.5: Project Scheduling Software - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0          11.5: Exercises - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
    8.6: Exercises - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0                            11.6: Web Exercise - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
    8.7: Software and Technology Exercises - CC BY-NC-
    SA 4.0                                                  12: Project Procurement and Closure - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

9: Estimating and Managing Costs - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0              12.1: Identifying the Need for Resources Outside the
                                                                Organization - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
    9.1: Estimating Costs - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0                     12.2: Procurement Plan - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
    9.2: Managing the Budget - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0                  12.3: Selecting the Type of Contract - CC BY-NC-SA
    9.3: Exercises - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0                            4.0
    9.4: Software and Technology Exercise - CC BY-NC-           12.4: Procurement Process - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
    SA 4.0                                                      12.5: Project Closure - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
                                                                12.6: Exercises - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
10: Managing Project Quality - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0                  12.7: Web Exercises - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

    10.1: Quality and Statistics - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0          Back Matter - Undeclared
    10.2: Development of Quality as a Competitive
    Advantage - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0                                 Index - Undeclared
    10.3: Relevance of Quality Programs to Project              Glossary - Undeclared
    Quality - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0                                   Detailed Licensing - Undeclared
    10.4: Planning and Controlling Project Quality - CC
    BY-NC-SA 4.0

                                                         2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/95277
