Sports Marketing
Sports Marketing

  An Australian Perspective

  DR JESSICA RICHARDS

          WESTERN SYDNEY UNIVERSITY
Sports Marketing by Jessica Richards is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except
where otherwise noted.
Contents

Introduction                                    1

Acknowledgment of Country                       4

From inception to publication: A heartfelt      vi

thank you to the team

Meet The Author                                 vii

Part I. Main Body

1. The unique nature of sport marketing         9

2. Understanding the sport consumer             21

3. Selling an experience: marketing intangible  31

objects

4. The marketing plan                           45

5. Market segmentation and target marketing in  60

sport

6. Market research in the sport industry        75

7. Sports marketing in an omnichannel world     86

8. Managing a sports brand                      96

9. Promotion and customer service               108

10. Corporate sponsorship and memberships       120

11. Community and stakeholders                  132

12. Introducing the "Sports Marketing Mix"      146

Appendix                                        161
Introduction

Welcome to Western Sydney University newest Sports
Management course BUSM 2048 Sports Marketing.

                    One or more interactive elements has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You can
        view them online here:
        https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
        sportmarketing/?p=4#oembed-1

Sports marketing encompasses the utilisation of athletic
events, personalities, and teams as a means to advertise and
sell goods and services. The implementation of an effective
sports marketing strategy is vital for the growth and success of
a sports organization, as it helps to establish brand awareness,
foster customer loyalty, and generate revenue. Companies
operating in the sports industry adopt a range of marketing
techniques, including attracting junior players, involving
parents and the community, enhancing their public image,
entertaining spectators, securing sponsorship deals, and
negotiating broadcast rights agreements, to accomplish their
objectives.

   By working through this Pressbook you will learn general
marketing knowledge and theories relevant to the sports
industry, such as sponsorship, endorsements, customer
experience, pricing and operations.

                                                                                  Introduction | 1
     Learning Objectives

        1. Examine sports marketing strategies and the role of
     marketing in promoting sports nationally and globally.

        2. Apply marketing theoretical frameworks and
     concepts to the unique factors and characteristics of
     the modern sports industry.

        3. Analyse market research sources necessary to
     understand the effectiveness of a marketing campaign

        4. Identify the evolution of sports marketing from a
     production, product, and sales focus.

        5. Describe the unique nature of sports marketing
     and the various stakeholders who make up the sports
     industry.

        To reach these learning goals, this unit covers a range
     of topics and themes throughout various learning
     modules.

          Together we will explore the following
            · The unique nature of sports marketing
            · Sports markets and stakeholder
                engagement
            · Sports consumers and fan typologies

2 | Introduction
· Market segmentation and target marketing
   within the sports industry

· Managing and promoting a sports brand
· Sponsorship, corporate partnerships and the

   role of game-day activations
· Different modes of sales and service in the

   sports industry
· Value of market research and analytics for

   the sport industry

Cover image for Sports    Cover image attribution: `Stadium
Marketing: An Australian  seating that is empty'© Jessica
Perspective book          Richards is licensed under a CC0
                          (Creative Commons Zero) license

                          Introduction | 3
Acknowledgment of
Country

Western Sydney University acknowledges the custodians of the
lands in which we meet, work, learn and socialise. We pay
respect to the peoples of the Darug, Tharawal, Eora and
Wiradjuri nations where are campuses are located. We
acknowledge that the teaching, learning and research
undertaken across our campuses continues the teaching,
learning and research that has occurred on these lands for tens
of thousands of years. We acknowledge and pay our respect to
the Elders past, present and emerging.

Indigenous artwork titled Matta: Meeting Place which was co created
by Jason and Trevor Dalmarri Western Sydney University staff

Co-created by the team of WSU School of Business, Parramatta,
this artwork represents the lands and communities upon
which the Parramatta City campus is built. The word
Parramatta comes from the Aboriginal word `Baramada or
Burramatta'. The Burramatta people (Burra meaning place and
4 | Acknowledgment of Country
Matta meaning the eels) belong to the Dhurug people, who
lived in this food-rich area before the time of the white invasion.

   The story to this artwork is the land you work on today,
showing the diversity of the area and paying respects to the
past.

   The "Matta" roamed along these rivers and grew large along
the banks of the Burramatta river and in abundance. The green
and blue waterways run through the artwork as they moved
ever so gracefully up and down the inlets. The artwork shows
the bubbles, the current, and the plentiful fish running
through what today is known as Parramatta. The shoreline
depicts the edge of the land as the waters head out to Sydney
Harbour and the ocean.

   The colourful sections represent all the towns surrounding
Burramatta. inside those towns are circles belonging to
multicultural families now living on Dhurug country. The dot
lines and tracks were once walking lines of the Dhurug people,
now turned into roads, routes, and railway lines.

   These lands occupy the growth of the town now called
Parramatta in honour of the first Australians. Western Sydney
University acknowledges the Dhurug nation as the traditional
owners of the lands we work and live on today.

Media Attributions

  · Matta: Meeting Place © Jason and Trevor Dalmarri is
      licensed under a CC BY-NC-ND (Attribution
      NonCommercial NoDerivatives) license

                                                         Acknowledgment of Country | 5
From inception to
publication: A heartfelt
thank you to the team

I would like to take this opportunity to express my deep
appreciation to all those who have contributed to the creation
of this book.

   I am deeply appreciative of the exceptional efforts made by
the Western Sydney University library team, particularly Paul
Jewell and Karen Sheehy, who served as my MVP (most
valuable players) at the WSU Library team.

   Their vital contributions in maintaining the high quality and
excellence of this book since its inception were instrumental
in shaping it into what it is today. Their unwavering dedication
and expertise were essential to the success of this project, and
I am extremely grateful for their support. Thank you both!

   Additionally, I would like to express my heartfelt thanks to
Lucy Walton and Jeffrey Har for their outstanding
contributions and collaboration in the final stages.

   I would like to recognise Frank Hill, our University Copyright
Officer, for his indispensable support in navigating the intricate
world of copyright law.

   Lastly, I would like to extend my appreciation to the industry
partners and sports staff who provided me with the relevant
and practical content to create a real-world-focused textbook
for students in sports marketing.

   To all who have played a part in bringing this book to life, I
express my heartfelt gratitude. Without your unwavering
support and contributions, this project would not have been
possible.

6 | From inception to publication: A heartfelt thank you to the team
Meet The Author

                    Photo of Dr. Jess Richards
Hi, I am Dr. Jess Richards.

   I am currently a Senior Lecturer in Sports Management in the
School of Business at Western Sydney University. My research
broadly focuses on sports management, sports marketing,
event management and measuring the social impact of sports
for all members of the community. I aim to contribute to our
understanding of sports consumers and provide sports
organisations with opportunities to grow and sustain their

                                                                           Meet The Author | 7
current fan base with new and innovative strategies. My
research also aims to explore the benefit of engaging with
sport for all members of the community, with a focus
particularly on advancing the visibility of women's sports.

   I wrote this Pressbook for you, because, at the time of
designing this unit, I struggled to find a textbook I thought
would suit the aims and outcomes of this unit. With Australia
having such a unique relationship with sports, I wanted to
showcase some of the great (and not-so-great) things
happening within our industry when it comes to marketing.
This book is filled with real-world industry case studies and
examples that are contextualised with the overall global
sporting world.

   I hope you enjoy working through this material as much as I
had creating it.

   Contact me: j.richards@westernsydney.edu.au

Media Attributions

  · Dr. Jess Richards © Jessica Richards is licensed under a
      CC0 (Creative Commons Zero) license

8 | Meet The Author
1. The unique nature of
sport marketing

     Learning objectives

          · Understand the size and scope of the Australian
             sports industry and what has contributed to this
             growth.

          · Recognise the unique relationship between
             marketing and sport.

          · To become acquainted with the complex
             nature of marketing sport as a product.

Introduction

This chapter sets the scene for students in terms of the key
issues that the book addresses. It provides an introduction and
overview of the foundational concepts of the `sports industry'
and `marketing'. We then discuss the key events that have
shaped the Australian sports industry. Although the sports
industry is already a major industry, the business of sports
continues to expand. To help us understand how sport
maintains its economic, social and cultural currency this
chapter provides an overview of the basic concepts of
marketing.

                                           The unique nature of sport marketing | 9
                       One or more interactive elements has been
                       excluded from this version of the text. You can
           view them online here:
           https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
           sportmarketing/?p=5#oembed-1

 How big is sport in Australia?

  The Australian sports ecosystem has evolved to be a $32.2
  billion dollar industry and is one that employs over 120,000
  people all over the country1. Leading sports industry experts
  have predicted that we are expecting a "golden decade" for
  employment, with Australia set to host the Olympic Games in
  2032 and the Commonwealth Games in 2026.

     However, in order to understand the sports industry and
  what employment in this field will look like, it is important
  we consider what the sport industry is. What is included in
  the sports industry and how has that evolved with social and
  technological developments within broader society? Whilst
  social media has been a major contributor to the growth of

1. KPMG 2020, Sports Industry Economic Analysis Exploring the
  size and growth potential of the Sport Industry in Australia,
  viewed 2 October 2021 <https://www.health.gov.au/sites/
  default/files/documents/2020/05/sports-industry-economic-
  analysis.pdf>

  10 | The unique nature of sport marketing
   sport communication employment, there are many layers to
   the Australian sports sector.

  What is the sports industry?

   The sports and entertainment sector is a huge industry offering
   numerous products and services. It is estimated that the
   Australian sports industry generated approximately $32.2
   billion in sales in 2016/17, resulting in a contribution to gross
   domestic product (GDP) of approximately $14.4 billion. It also
   supports approximately 128,000 full-time equivalent jobs2.

      For context, this is approximately 0.8% of GDP and 1.5% of
   total Australian employment3. The sports industry itself is
   incredibly diverse, encompassing three key sectors: public,
   non-profit and the commercial sector4. It is important to
   consider however that rather than being independent, these
   sectors overlap, and sector boundaries are becoming
   increasingly blurred with multiple streams of income often

2. KPMG 2020, Sports Industry Economic Analysis Exploring the
   size and growth potential of the Sport Industry in Australia,
   viewed 2 October 2021, <https://www.health.gov.au/sites/
   default/files/documents/2020/05/sports-industry-economic-
   analysis.pdf>

3. KPMG 2020, Sports Industry Economic Analysis Exploring the
   size and growth potential of the Sport Industry in Australia,
   viewed 2 October 2021, <https://www.health.gov.au/sites/
   default/files/documents/2020/05/sports-industry-economic-
   analysis.pdf>

4. Pitts, BG & Zhang, JJ (eds) 2016, Global sport management:
   Contemporary issues and inquiries, vol. 1, Taylor & Francis,
   London.

                                               The unique nature of sport marketing | 11
   coming from all three to fund and support sport all over the
   country.

     · Public Sector: Australian governments at all levels play a
         leading role in delivering sport and sport related policies
         and programs. This includes providing support and
         funding to sporting organisations, clubs and individuals,
         being major investors and contributors to building and
         maintaining sports related infrastructure, and sponsoring
         the hosting of major sports events5. For example, the
         Australian Government is committed to supporting sport
         in Australia from grassroots to elite, including: increasing
         participation in physical and recreational activities to
         promote physical and mental health; staging world class
         major sporting events; and utilising sport as a vehicle to
         address disadvantage and social inclusion challenges.

             Did you know: Western Sydney Stadium,
          commercially known as CommBank Stadium, is
          actually owned by the NSW Government. Whilst it is
          operated by VenuesLive it is owned by the NSW
          Government who foot the $300 million bill to build
          the stadium which opened in 2019.

     · Non-Profit Sector: The non-profit or voluntary sector is
         made up of community-based clubs, community-led
         governing associations and sport organizations that

5. Pitts, BG & Zhang, JJ (eds) 2016, Global sport management:
   Contemporary issues and inquiries, vol. 1, Taylor & Francis,
   London.

   12 | The unique nature of sport marketing
         provide competition and participation opportunities,
         regulate and manage sporting codes but at a grassroots
         or amateur level6. This group also comprises of the charity
         and other organisations that use sport as a tool for social
         development and inclusion.
         Some examples of this include;

                              An interactive H5P element has been
                              excluded from this version of the text. You
                  can view it online here:
                  https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
                  sportmarketing/?p=5#h5p-2

     · Commercial sector: The commercial sector is comprised
         of professional leagues and their member teams, as well
         as allied organisations such as sporting apparel and
         equipment manufacturers, media companies, major stadia
         operators, and event managers. It is a huge industry and
         one that has a purpose on making financial gain through
         sport7. This section of the sport industry is very fluid and
         adaptable to change over time. For example, to remain
         successful in the sport industry commercial partners need
         to show creativity, innovation and adaptability. This
         includes accounting for changing consumer behaviours
         when it comes to consuming sport. We all know spectators

6. Bradbury, T & O'Boyle, I (eds), 2017, Understanding sport
   management: International perspectives, Taylor & Francis,
   London.

7. Westerbeek, H (ed.) 2013, Global sport business: Community
   impacts of commercial sport. Routledge, Oxon.

                                              The unique nature of sport marketing | 13
         want more from the game-day experience- and this is
         evident by the growth of more engaging and immersive
         experiences inside and around stadium areas. There is also
         rapid growth in sports not traditionally considered by this
         sector. For example, the growth of e-sports, extreme sports
         and combat sports (such as MMA fighting).

  Case study: A stadium for Tasmania?

              The Tasmanian government's plans for a $750
           million stadium on Hobart's waterfront have been
           welcomed by AFL heavyweights, but there are
           questions over where the money will come from
           and how many games would now be played in the
           north of the state. However, the Australian Liberal
           Party is becoming more divided on the controversial
           new million dollar stadium set to be built in Hobart
           at Macquarie Point. Federal Liberal Member for Bass
           Bridget Archer has stated that she does not believe
           that taxpayers should be paying for a new stadium,
           while veteran Liberal advisor Brad Stansfield has
           labelled it `madness'. I spoke to reporter Hamish
           Spence about the proposed stadium in Tasmania.
           Read the article he wrote on the topic here: How
           Hobart Stadium can become more than a
           `bargaining chip'8.

8. Spence, H , 2022, How Hobart Stadium can become more

   14 | The unique nature of sport marketing
              After reading the article, watch the following
           video9 and then consider the following questions
           ahead of this week's class.

                                One or more interactive elements has
                                been excluded from this version of the
                    text. You can view them online here:
                    https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
                    sportmarketing/?p=5#oembed-2

                So, should Governments be funding stadiums?
              What are the benefits and limitations of funding

                                          stadiums?

   than `bargaining chip', 23 October, News.com.au,
   <https://www.news.com.au/entertainment/how-hobart-
   stadium-can-become-more-than-bargaining-chip/news-story/
   adea52ec4362050cceded8dd499a9f1d>.
9. ABC News Australia 2022, Tasmanian government announces
   a new stadium site ahead of AFL bid, 19 September, online
   video, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E_9VI5UloUI>.

                                              The unique nature of sport marketing | 15
What is the relationship between
marketing and sport?

The relationship between marketing and sport is a complex
one. It can be used to increase fans interest, drive sports
participation and/or the consumption of sports-related
products (such as broadcasting events and merchandise).
Sports marketing is a way that companies can use a persons
love of sports to make a profit and reach out to people who
may not otherwise be exposed to their brand.

   Athletes and brands share a long history, which has made
their relationship more prominent overtime. This is why
athletes are a medium for advertising and promoting popular
brands and their products. Fans of players and of sports
perceive athletes as role models, which in turn raises the
popularity of the sponsored brand of the athletes.

   However, this relationship has not always been a
comfortable one!

          Where Do You Draw The Line?
       Some might say we have come a long way from the
       Benson and Hedges series and the Winfield cup,
       but have we really? The relationship between sports
       and advertising is a long one, and it's not always
       been comfortable. As players increasingly scrutinise
       what it is they are wearing and tacitly endorsing, are
       we as fans also reconsidering what it is we are
       supporting?

          Have a listen to this podcast that explores the

16 | The unique nature of sport marketing
            uncomfortable relationship between sports and
            advertising10

               [Aired: 27 October 2022]

  How does sport and marketing work
  together?

    Companies have long recognised the value of sport as a
    catalyst for communicating to the masses and often use sport
    as a means to advertise their products. However, increased
    financial pressures, combined with a growing number of
    different sponsors has forced sports marketers to become
    more innovative and creative when designing and activating
    sports sponsorship. Marketers have the tricky job in ensuring
    that their brand aligns with that of the sport code and the
    athletes that sporting code represents.

       There are two definitions that can help us understand on a
    basic level the relationship between sport and marketing.

       Firstly, we have the "marketing of sport", i.e. the set of
    activities and competences intended for the promotion and
    improvement of sports enjoyment and consumption. Then we
    have "marketing with or through sport" which is the use of

10. Hunt, R & Carter, J 2022, The uncomfortable relationship
    between sport and advertising, ABC Melbourne Radio, 27
    October, online audio, <https://www.abc.net.au/melbourne/
    programs/theconversationhour/the-conversation-hour/
    14089876>

                                               The unique nature of sport marketing | 17
    sport as a communication tool for businesses to sell or position/
    market their product11.

       Examples of marketing of sport include Electronic Arts (EA)
    Sports who have just signed a new partnership with Sky Sports,
    which will see the gaming firm sponsor the UK pay-TV
    network's Premier League coverage. The deal, which kicks in
    from the 2022/23 season, will see EA Sports branded content
    used across Sky's Premier League coverage until the end of the
    2024/25 campaign, using a blend of gameplay video from the
    FIFA gaming series with real-life action. See the video below12.

                         One or more interactive elements has been
                         excluded from this version of the text. You can
             view them online here:
             https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
             sportmarketing/?p=5#oembed-3

    Examples of marketing through sport include brands such as
    Gillette who have utilised the popularity of Raheem Sterling
    to promote its latest razor. The England footballer and anti-
    racism campaigner is the face of a new 2022 TV advert, which
    sees the star demonstrating the perfect shave before showing
    off some fancy footwork. Dominated by the black-and-green

11. Venturoli, E 2022, Sport Marketing types: marketing of sport
    and marketing through sport, RTR Sports Marketing, Available
    at <https://rtrsports.com/en/blog/sports-marketing-types-
    marketing-of-sport-and-marketing-through-sport/>

12. The Media Leader 2022, EA reveals idents for Sky Sports
    Premier League three-year sponsorship, 4 August, online
    video, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zoItz0mZgs4>

    18 | The unique nature of sport marketing
    visual identity of the Gillette Labs Exfoliating Razor as a
    backdrop, the campaign conveys the message that your
    morning routine can be effortless when you have the right
    tools for the job. Take a look at the campaign in the below
    video13 and tell us what you think?

                         One or more interactive elements has been
                         excluded from this version of the text. You can
             view them online here:
             https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
             sportmarketing/?p=5#oembed-4

       Now let's have a go - using the examples below type into the
    box either "marketing of sport" or "marketing through sport"

                         An interactive H5P element has been excluded
                         from this version of the text. You can view it online
             here:
             https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
             sportmarketing/?p=5#h5p-1

13. Gillette UK 2022, Gillette Labs x Raheem Sterling - exfoliating
    razor, 23 February, online video, <https://www.youtube.com/
    watch?v=wg6VLAcBpv0>.
                                               The unique nature of sport marketing | 19
   What are the experts saying about the
   future of sports marketing?

    According to some experts, the future of marketing could
    come from some technologies that until yesterday seemed
    almost science fiction. We're talking about Virtual Reality,
    Augmented Reality, and Hybrid Reality14. Many brands in the
    sports industry have made, or are making, interesting
    experiments in this direction. Throughout this unit we will be
    exploring these trends as well as the fundamentals of sports
    marketing.

           Where we were, where we are now and where we are
        going in relation to the commercial side of sport will be

                             covered throughout this unit.

14. Mamo, Y, Su, Y & Andrew, DP 2022, 'The transformative impact
    of big data applications in sport marketing: current and future
    directions', International Journal of Sports Marketing and
    Sponsorship, vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 594-611.
     20 | The unique nature of sport marketing
2. Understanding the
sport consumer

     Learning Objectives

          · An understanding of the different types of sport
             consumers.

          · Explain the sport decision-making process and
             the factors that influence an individual's decision
             to consume a particular sport or sport-related
             product, such as situational factors, personal
             factors, and social factors.

          · Analyse the factors that affect the types of sport
             consumers, including age, gender, income,
             education level, geographic location, and cultural
             background.

          · Evaluate the role of attitudes in sport
             marketing, including the tri-component model of
             attitudes, which includes affective, behavioral,
             and cognitive components.

Introduction

Sports consumers refer to individuals or groups who purchase
products or services related to sports, such as tickets to games,

                                              Understanding the sport consumer | 21
  team merchandise, or equipment for participating in a sport.
  They may also include individuals who regularly watch sports
  on television or streaming platforms or engage with sports
  content on social media.

                       One or more interactive elements has been
                       excluded from this version of the text. You can
           view them online here:
           https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
           sportmarketing/?p=25#oembed-1

 Types of sport consumers

  There are several types of sport consumers, which can be
  grouped based on different characteristics such as their level
  of engagement with sports, their purchasing behaviour, or the
  types of products or services they consume 1

     Some examples of types of sport consumers include:

                       An interactive H5P element has been excluded
                       from this version of the text. You can view it online

1. Adapted from Stewart, B, Smith, A & Nicholson, M 2003, 'Sport
  consumer typologies: A critical review', Sport Marketing
  Quarterly, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 206-16.
  22 | Understanding the sport consumer
        here:
        https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
        sportmarketing/?p=25#h5p-4

   These are just a few examples of the many types of sport
consumers that exist. It's important to note that individuals
may also belong to multiple categories and their behaviour
may change over time. Think about how you may change on a
yearly or even weekly basis!

          What is the difference between a sport fan and
       sport consumer?
       A sports fan is someone who actively follows and
       supports a particular team or athlete, often
       attending games or watching them on TV. They may
       also have an emotional connection to the team or
       athlete. A sport consumer is someone who
       purchases goods or services related to sports, such
       as tickets to games, merchandise, or subscriptions to
       streaming services that show live games. They may
       be interested in the sport, but not necessarily
       emotionally invested in a particular team or athlete.

Can a sport fan be a sport consumer?

Yes, a sports fan can also be a sports consumer. They may
purchase tickets to games, merchandise, and subscriptions to

                                             Understanding the sport consumer | 23
   streaming services to show their support for their favourite
   team or athlete. However, not all sports fans are sports
   consumers, and not all sports consumers are sports fans. Some
   people may choose to consume sports content, such as
   watching games on TV or streaming them online, without
   actively following or supporting a particular team or athlete.

      Make sure you have a look at how other scholars have
   described and defined different types of fans (specifically!) in
   the extra readings available for this week! These include works
   by Stewart et. al2 which explains the difference between
   dualistic, tiered and multidimensional fan typologies.

  Sport consumption decision-making
  process

   The sport consumption decision-making process refers to the
   series of steps that a consumer goes through when deciding to
   purchase a product or service related to sports. It is important
   to understand the sport consumer decision-making process
   because it can provide valuable insights into how individuals
   make choices related to sport participation and consumption3.

      By understanding the various factors that influence the
   decision-making process, organisations and businesses in the
   sport industry can develop more effective marketing

2. Stewart, B, Smith, A, & Nicholson, M 2003, 'Sport consumer
   typologies: A critical review', Sport Marketing Quarterly, vol. 12,
   no. 4, pp. 206-16.

3. Yim, BH & Byon KK 2020, 'Critical factors in the sport
   consumption decision making process of millennial fans: A
   revised model of goal-directed behavior', International Journal
   of Sports Marketing and Sponsorship, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 427-47.

   24 | Understanding the sport consumer
   strategies, improve customer engagement and satisfaction,
   and ultimately increase revenue.

                        One or more interactive elements has been
                        excluded from this version of the text. You can
            view them online here:
            https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
            sportmarketing/?p=25#oembed-2

                  As the video above explains, these steps may
                                            include4:

               1. Need recognition: The consumer realises
                   that they have a need or desire for a product or
                   service related to sports.

              2. Information search: The consumer seeks out
                   information about different products or
                   services that could fulfil their need or desire
                   related to sport.

              3. Evaluation of alternatives: The consumer
                   evaluates the different options they have
                   found and compares them to one another in

4. Adapted from Hartley, P 2021, Types of consumer decisions, 23
   April, online video, <https://www.youtube.com/
   watch?v=OSVngDbxx5Q>.

                                                 Understanding the sport consumer | 25
                terms of features, benefits, and costs.
          4. Purchase decision: The consumer makes a

                choice of which product or service to purchase.
           5. Post-purchase evaluation: The consumer

                evaluates their satisfaction with the product or
                service they have chosen after they have used
                it.

Factors that affect what types of "sport" is
consumed?

There are many factors that can affect sport consumption,
including both internal and external factors. Understanding
the factors that affect sport consumption can also help to
design policies and programs to promote sport participation,
and create a more inclusive and equitable environment for all
individuals, regardless of their background or abilities.

                    An interactive H5P element has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view it online
        here:
        https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
        sportmarketing/?p=25#h5p-5

These are just a few examples of the many factors that can

26 | Understanding the sport consumer
affect sport consumption behaviour. It's important to note that
the significance and impact of these factors may vary
depending on the individual, the context, and the specific
product or service being consumed.

          Note: This is at the most basic level with
       scholarship providing various models to help us
       explain this in a far more meaningful way - let's
       explore one now (with additional ones in the weekly
       additional readings)

Understanding Attitudes

The concept of attitudes in marketing explores the cognitive,
affective, and behavioural dispositions of consumers towards a
particular product, brand, or company. This is a complex and
multifaceted topic that encompasses various theoretical
perspectives. However, for the purpose of this unit, it is essential
to limit the scope of analysis to a specific theoretical approach,
in order to gain a deeper understanding of the subject matter.

   In its basic form attitudes can be positive, negative, or
neutral. Attitudes are formed through a person's experiences,
beliefs, and values. Marketing campaigns aim to influence
consumer attitudes by highlighting the benefits of a product
or brand and addressing any potential concerns. Positive
attitudes towards a product or brand can lead to increased
brand loyalty and repeat purchases. Negative attitudes can
make it difficult for a company to sell their products or services.
Understanding consumer attitudes is important for businesses
as it helps them to develop marketing strategies that
effectively target their audience.

                                             Understanding the sport consumer | 27
  The tri-component model of attitudes

   The tri-component model of attitudes is a popular way for us
   to understand theoretically how attitudes towards sport are
   formed and maintained by those consuming it. The model
   consists of three components: affective, behavioural and
   cognitive5.

    1. Affective component: This refers to the emotional or
         feelings aspect of attitudes towards sport. It includes
         positive or negative feelings such as pleasure, excitement,
         and satisfaction that people have towards a sport or sport-
         related object.

    2. Behavioural component: This refers to the actions or
         behaviours that people exhibit as a result of their attitudes
         towards sport. For example, a person who holds a positive
         attitude towards a sport may engage in behaviours such
         as watching games or attending events.

    3. Cognitive component: This refers to the beliefs,
         knowledge, and perceptions that people hold about a
         sport or sport-related object. For example, a person who
         holds a positive attitude towards a sport may believe that
         the sport is exciting and fun, while a person who holds a
         negative attitude may believe that the sport is boring or
         uninteresting.

5. The framework was established by Rosenberg, MJ & Hovland
   CI 1960, 'Cognitive, affective, and behavioural components of
   attitudes', in MJ Rosenberg & CI Hovland (eds), Attitude
   organization and change: An analysis of consistency among
   attitude components, Yale University Press, New Haven, CT,
   pp. 1-14.

   28 | Understanding the sport consumer
          How can this help us understand sport: Let's
       look at buying a pair of sports shoes!

          The tri-component model of attitudes can be
       applied to a case study involving sport purchasing
       by analysing the cognitive, affective, and
       behavioural components of a specific individual or
       group. For example, consider a case study of a
       consumer who is looking to purchase a new pair of
       running shoes.

          In terms of cognitive component, the consumer
       may have knowledge and beliefs about the sport
       such as the importance of proper footwear and the
       different types of running shoes available. They may
       also have perceptions about different brands and
       the features they offer.

          In terms of affective component, the consumer
       may have positive feelings and emotions towards
       the sport such as enjoyment and excitement, and
       they may also have a sense of accomplishment
       when they run. They may also have a sense of health
       and fitness associated with the sport.

          In terms of behavioural component, the
       consumer may engage in behaviours related to the
       sport such as running regularly, watching running
       competitions on television or online and talking
       about running with friends and family. They may
       also be more likely to purchase running shoes and
       other equipment to improve their performance

Overall this model suggests that attitudes towards sport are a

                                             Understanding the sport consumer | 29
combination of emotions, actions, and beliefs, and that these
three components are interrelated. Change in one component
may lead to change in other components. For example, if a
person experiences a positive emotional response to a new
sport, they may develop a more positive attitude towards it
and be more likely to engage in behaviours such as watching
games or attending events.

   Okay, we have covered a lot this week so let's do a knowledge
check!

                    An interactive H5P element has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view it online
        here:
        https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
        sportmarketing/?p=25#h5p-6

30 | Understanding the sport consumer
3. Selling an
experience: marketing
intangible objects

     Learning Objectives

          · Explain the concept of "experience marketing"
             and its importance in the context of sports
             marketing, including the role of emotions,
             memories, and nostalgia in creating a lasting
             impression on target audiences.

          · Apply the BETTER Model developed by Shirra
             Smilansky (2017) to the sports marketing industry,
             including the factors of brand personality,
             emotional connection, target audience, two-way
             interaction, exponential elements, and reach.

          · Analyse and critique real-world examples of
             sports marketing campaigns to gain a better
             understanding of the application of experience
             marketing in the sports industry.

          · Understand the process of conceptualising and
             executing a sports marketing campaign that sells
             an experience, including the creation of unique,
             memorable, and personalised experiences for a
             target audience.

                      Selling an experience: marketing intangible objects | 31
Introduction

In the world of sports, people want more than just a ticket to a
game. They want an experience that connects with them on an
emotional level. This is where experience marketing comes in
- instead of just selling a product, it's all about selling feelings,
memories, and personal connections. And it's becoming a big
deal in the sport industry, as fans want more than just a game
- they want to feel like they're part of the team and the event.

   The sports industry in Australia is a thriving sector with a
strong following. The popularity of sports such as Australian
Football League (AFL), National Rugby League (NRL), netball
and cricket, has created a demand for marketing intangible
objects, such as experiences and memories. This chapter will
discuss the marketing of intangible objects in the sports
industry in Australia, focusing on the unique challenges and
opportunities that come with marketing experiences and
memories in this sector.

                    One or more interactive elements has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You can
        view them online here:
        https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
        sportmarketing/?p=174#oembed-1

What is experience marketing?

Experience marketing has become a popular approach for
companies and brands to create memorable experiences for

32 | Selling an experience: marketing intangible objects
   customers and gain a competitive advantage. This trend is
   seen a lot in the sport-service industry, where professional
   clubs, leagues, and sporting events are implementing this
   approach to attract more attendees and increase revenue.

      It is important to think about the goal of experience
   marketing - which is to create a lasting, emotional connection
   between a brand and its customers by providing them with
   unique and memorable experiences. This approach is used to
   differentiate a brand (a sports club or league) from its
   competitors and create a strong, positive brand image in the
   minds of consumers1.

      One study that looks into this issue sought to understand
   the personal experiences of sports spectators and how these
   experiences impact their behaviour and perception of the
   brand. To do this, the researchers interviewed 26 fans who had
   visited Stade Français Paris Rugby Club games at the Stade de
   France2.

      The study analysed the experiences of sports event
   spectators and the impact of experiential marketing on the
   sports service brand.

     · First, the research looked at different consumer profiles in
         relation to the type of experience they searched for and
         how it relates to unique experiences.

     · Second, the impact of the experience marketing strategy
         on the sports event brand was evaluated.

     · The study found that many of the spectators interviewed

1. Tynan, C & McKechnie S 2009, 'Experience marketing: a review
   and reassessment', Journal of Marketing Management, vol. 25,
   no. 5-6, pp. 501-17.

2. Chanavat, N & Bodet, G 2014, 'Experiential marketing in sport
   spectatorship services: A customer perspective', European
   Sport Management Quarterly, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 323-44.

                         Selling an experience: marketing intangible objects | 33
      had an interactive profile, seeking extraordinary and
      emotionally intense experiences. Socialising and
      communal activities, such as attending events with family
      and friends, were also a common theme among the
      participants. Pricing was also a significant issue for many,
      with some having obtained free or cheap tickets, which
      could indicate an opportunistic profile rather than an
      interactive one.

      A picture of a full sports stadium

The results from this research showed that ambiance was a
crucial aspect of the experience, with the more people in
attendance, the better the atmosphere. This was particularly
important for the Stade Français PRC's pricing strategy, which
aimed to fill the Stade de France with a lively crowd. The study
found that aesthete and supporter spectators had different
preferences and experiences, with games at the regular home
ground being more immersive and enjoyable for supporter
spectators.

34 | Selling an experience: marketing intangible objects
  Selling an experience

   One of the biggest challenges in marketing experiences is that
   they are intangible, meaning that they cannot be touched,
   held or seen. However, this intangible nature also presents a
   unique opportunity to create a lasting impact on the
   consumer. To successfully market experiences, companies in
   the sports industry must focus on creating memorable and
   unique experiences for their consumers/fans.

      This can include offering exclusive access to players, creating
   interactive events, or incorporating technology to enhance the
   experience. Take a look at this video of Sam released for those
   who follow Chelsea football club on Youtube3. It also links fans
   to the app, where they can receive more content.

                       One or more interactive elements has been
                       excluded from this version of the text. You can
            view them online here:
            https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
            sportmarketing/?p=174#oembed-2

   Selling an experience is popular in sports because it often
   creates a strong emotional connection with fans. This can lead
   to more loyalty and repeat business. Plus, it sets a team or
   event apart from the competition, as people don't compare
   experiences in the same way as physical products. Selling an

3. Chelsea Football Club 2021, Exclusive behind the scenes
   access to Sam Kerr's contract signing, 17 November, online
   video, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H1SgRsx5fHY>.

                         Selling an experience: marketing intangible objects | 35
experience is a critical component of sports marketing as it
taps into the emotional side of the consumer and creates a
lasting connection with them.

   In today's highly competitive market, creating a memorable
experience for fans can set a team or event apart from others
and foster customer loyalty. This is because experiences are
unique and personal, and people are less likely to compare
them to other products or experiences in the same way they
might compare physical products.

     A study of returning "home"

        Studies have shown that customers are more likely to
     be repeat customers (attend more games) and
     recommend a team or event to others (such as their
     family and friends) if they have had a positive
     emotional experience.

        For example, I led a research project that explored
     this issue when I partnered with the Parramatta Eels to
     understand how fans can build an emotional
     connection with their built home stadium, Commbank
     Stadium, when it opened in 2019. Our study explored
     what it's like for fans of the Parramatta Eels to go to a
     game, and we asked them what they thought about
     the fan experience at their newly built stadium.

        The goal of the research was to understand how the
     different areas within the newly built stadium affected
     how fans act and interacted with each other. Two
     specific areas were looked at, the "fan zone" and the

36 | Selling an experience: marketing intangible objects
"stadium concourse", and it was found that these areas
play a big role in shaping the behaviour and
atmosphere of the fans.

A picture of sports fans cheering at a sports game

   Interestingly, our research also found that the
traditional way of experiencing a footy game at a
stadium can be altered and enhanced by these new
areas, and that fans were very positive in talking about
the change. You have probably heard about fans
protesting at the thought of a "new" or "souless"
stadium, fearing the new builds would lose the feeling
and fan experience.

               Selling an experience: marketing intangible objects | 37
           However, our research found that those experiences
        can be recreated and reimagined in a newly built
        modern stadium (with cleaner toilets!). We have written
        two articles about this issue and how Parramatta Eels
        created a memorable match-day experience which you
        will find referenced here in the following footnotes45,
        but also on vUWS.

  The importance of standing out

   Selling an experience and not just a ticket can also help to
   differentiate a team or event from its competitors. In the
   crowded and highly competitive world of sport marketing,
   creating a unique and memorable experience for fans can help
   a team or event stand out and attract new fans. By focusing
   on the emotional side of the consumer, teams and events can
   create a unique and memorable experience that will be
   difficult for competitors to replicate.

      Teams can make their experience unique by having special
   events, making the atmosphere at games special, and offering

4. Richards, J, Spanjaard, D, O'Shea, M & Garlin, F 2022, 'The
   changing carnival: reimagining and recreating the match-day
   experience in multi-purpose stadiums', Journal of Sport &
   Tourism, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 269-84.

5. Richards J, O'Shea, M, Spanjaard, D & Garlin, F 2021, 'You can
   rent it for a while, but it is our house': Sports fans' experience of
   returning `home' to a new multipurpose stadium',
   International Review for the Sociology of Sport, vol. 56, no. 7,
   pp. 981-96.

   38 | Selling an experience: marketing intangible objects
   exclusive benefits to fans. For example, teams might offer
   behind-the-scenes tours of the stadium, chances to meet
   players, or special seating areas with extra perks.

      Teams can also use technology to make the experience
   better, like having a mobile app for buying tickets and
   merchandise or using virtual reality to enhance the experience
   at the stadium. By making the fan experience different, teams
   can create a stronger emotional connection with their fans and
   increase their revenue through ticket sales and merchandise.

      Behind the scenes: Take a tour of Tottenham Hotspur
   Stadium6

                        One or more interactive elements has been
                        excluded from this version of the text. You can
            view them online here:
            https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
            sportmarketing/?p=174#oembed-3

   In class: Bring to class an example of a fan experience that
   you think was effective!

  Marketing memories/nostalgia

   Memories are a powerful tool in the marketing of intangible
   objects in the sports industry. The experiences created at live
   events or virtual experiences can evoke strong emotions and

6. Roobenstein 2019, Tottenham Hotspur stadium tour!
   Tottenham Hotspur FC!, 23 December, online video,
   <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kZJ5ahlYFZE>

                         Selling an experience: marketing intangible objects | 39
   create lasting memories for consumers. To effectively market
   memories, sport organisations must focus on creating unique,
   personalised and emotional experiences for consumers. This
   can include offering merchandise with personalised signatures
   or photographs, creating experiences that allow consumers to
   interact with their favourite players, or offering access to
   exclusive events or experiences7.

      The use of nostalgia in advertising and marketing sport is a
   technique that appeals to people by triggering memories of
   happy times from their past. People who are considered to be
   nostalgia-prone are those who constantly use these memories
   as a reference point in their enjoyment of experiences or
   products. Sport marketers also acknowledge the use of
   memories, both personal and collective, as a way of attracting
   sport consumers to keep coming back.

      Click here8 to read a study by Summers et al. (2001) that
   specifically focuses on the relevance of nostalgia-proneness to
   sport consumption.

                        One or more interactive elements has been

7. Gordon, KO 2013. 'Emotion and memory in nostalgia sport
   tourism: Examining the attraction to postmodern ballparks
   through an interdisciplinary lens', Journal of Sport & Tourism,
   vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 217-39.

8. Summers, J, Johnson, M & McColl-Kennedy J 2001, 'Evoking
   the Past: Exploring Nostalgia's Relevance to Sport
   Consumption', in PM Tidwell & TE Muller (eds), AP - Asia
   Pacific Advances in Consumer Research, vol. 4, Association
   for Consumer Research, Provo, Utah, pp. 108-13.

   40 | Selling an experience: marketing intangible objects
                        excluded from this version of the text. You can
            view them online here:
            https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
            sportmarketing/?p=174#oembed-4

   As the above video9 explains, user-generated content has
   revolutionised the way that sports organisations create fan
   experiences and sell them! In the past, sports teams would rely
   just on their own marketing efforts, such as advertisements
   and promotional events, to create a positive experience for fans.
   But with the rise of social media and online platforms, fans are
   now able to share their own experiences and opinions about
   their favourite teams.

      This has changed the game for sports organisations as they
   now have access to a wealth of information about what their
   fans like and dislike about the team, its games and events, as
   well as what they would like to see improved.

              Pretend you are a fan who attends a Sydney FC
           game and you post a picture of yourself on
           Instagram with a caption about how much you
           enjoyed the experience of watching the Sky Blues
           beat the Wanderers. Other fans then start to
           engage with your post, either by liking it, leaving a

9. GoDaddy 2019, What is user generated content and can it
   help your business?, 19 June, online video,
   <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6Jv0wsAlFnU>.

                         Selling an experience: marketing intangible objects | 41
       comment, or sharing it with their own followers.

A photo of twitter on a mobile phone
This type of user-generated content can be a valuable source
of information for Sydney FC as they can track the reach and
engagement of different types of posts to see what resonates
most with fans. In this way, sports organisations can make
data-driven decisions about how to improve the fan experience
and ensure that they are meeting the needs and expectations
of their fans.

42 | Selling an experience: marketing intangible objects
   The BETTER model for experience
   marketing

    As we have discussed experience marketing is a way for
    companies to connect with their customers by creating
    memorable and meaningful experiences that engage their
    senses, emotions, and intellect. The BETTER model10
    developed by Shirra Smilansky in their 2017 book Experiential
    Marketing: A Practical Guide to Interactive Brand Experiences
    sets up for us a framework for better understanding the best
    way sport teams can engage and understanding their
    consumers. Below you will find this model broken down.

                         An interactive H5P element has been excluded
                         from this version of the text. You can view it online
             here:
             https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
             sportmarketing/?p=174#h5p-10

     11

       By using the BETTER model, sport organisation's can design
    experiences that are not only enjoyable, but also leave a lasting
    impact on customers. This can lead to increased brand loyalty,

10. Smilansky, S 2017, Experiential marketing: A practical guide to
    interactive brand experiences, Kogan Page Publishers,
    London.

11. Adapted from Smilansky, S 2017, Experiential marketing: A
    practical guide to interactive brand experiences, Kogan Page
    Publishers, London.

                          Selling an experience: marketing intangible objects | 43
positive word-of-mouth, and the potential for repeat business.
In short, experience marketing is a valuable approach for
companies looking to create memorable and impactful
interactions with their customers.

Media Attributions

  · Stadium © Vienna Reyes on Unsplash
  · Sports Fans © Jimmy Conover
  · Twitter © Sovik Banerjee on Unsplash

44 | Selling an experience: marketing intangible objects
4. The marketing plan

          Disclaimer: This weeks focus on a marketing plan
       framework will serve as the foundation for your
       marketing proposal that you will be submitting as
       part of your course assessment. You may be
       wondering why we're discussing it so far in advance,
       but trust me, it's for a good reason!
       By having a clear understanding of the assignment
       requirements early on, you'll be able to fully grasp
       the weekly content and see its relevance to your
       overall plan. Think of each week as building up to
       the big event, just like how each training session
       leads to a winning game. So don't drop the ball and
       stay focused on the end goal! It might be a good
       idea for you to have a look at the assessment
       instructions for the portfolio ahead of this week.

     Learning Objectives

          · To understand the importance of an executive
             summary in a marketing plan and how it
             summarises the key elements of the plan.

          · To begin analysing the environment in which
             the sports organisation operates and the factors

                                                                     The marketing plan | 45
                that impact its marketing efforts
            · To explore the specific, measurable, attainable,

                relevant, and time-bound marketing objectives
                for the sports organisation
            · To be aware of the importance of effective
                marketing strategies that align with the
                organisation's goals and target audience
            · To understand the need to evaluate the success
                of the marketing plan and make modifications as
                needed to ensure that the objectives are being
                met.

 Introduction

  Success in the sports industry requires a strong plan to
  promote and sell products, services, and events to the target
  audience. A well-structured marketing plan plays a crucial role
  in this effort. In this chapter, we'll be exploring a marketing plan
  framework developed by Paul Blakey in his book on Sports
  Marketing (2011) and expanding and extending it to the
  example of the Australian sporting market. This framework
  encompasses several essential components, including an
  executive summary, analysis of the environment, marketing
  objectives, strategies, resourcing requirements and
  evaluation.1

1. Blakey, P 2011, Sport marketing, SAGE, Exeter, UK.

  46 | The marketing plan
                    One or more interactive elements has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You can
        view them online here:
        https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
        sportmarketing/?p=202#oembed-1

Executive Summary

A marketing plan's executive summary is a short overview of
what the plan covers. It explains the purpose of the plan and
outlines the main points that follow. Essentially, it's like a
summary of a summary!

   An executive summary for a sports marketing plan should
provide a succinct overview of the key elements of the plan.
It should include information for your reader (or marker!) on
the target audience, the objectives of the marketing campaign,
the strategies and tactics that will be used to reach those
objectives, and an overview of the budget and timeline for the
campaign.

   Additionally, it should provide a brief overview of the
competitive landscape and the unique value proposition of the
sports team or brand being marketed. It's important to
remember that the executive summary should be a "home
run" in terms of catching the reader's attention and making
them want to dive into the details of the full plan. Just like
a great play on the field, the executive summary should
highlight the excitement and potential impact of the
marketing plan. Keep it short, succinct and focused!

   There are plenty of examples of good `executive summaries'
of research reports. Have a look here at one I found online

                                                                     The marketing plan | 47
   which was published by Women in Sport (affiliated with Sport
   England) titled: Reframing Sport for Teenage Girls: Tackling
   Teenage Disengagement (the full report is available here2)

   Group of women in a huddle at a hockey game

             Remember: the executive summary of a research
          project only needs to be a quick rundown of the
          most important findings and suggestions for busy
          executives who might not have the time or interest

2. Sport England 2022, Reframing sport for teenage girls:
   Tackling teenage disengagement, Women in Sport,
   <https://womeninsport.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/03/
   Tackling-Teenage-Disengagement-March-2022.pdf>
   48 | The marketing plan
          to read the full report. It should be easy on the eyes
          and easy to understand, using simple words and
          clear headings to show off the main points. Working
          in sport, the executive summary is a crucial tool for
          sharing research findings with decision-makers and
          people who matter (the ones who decide what and
          who gets what and when). It needs be attention-
          grabbing and memorable, so that the research has
          the biggest impact and makes a real difference. By
          giving the reader the important elements of your
          plan in a quick, clear, and easy-to-digest way makes
          sure the research has a real impact.

   As an academic who works in this space, I have written my
   fair share of executive summaries. Our executive summary had
   some important statistics, insights into what's happening
   across the different clubs, and some suggestions for what
   Tennis Australia can do to be more inclusive. The goal was
   to give the reader a quick but solid understanding of what's
   important and what needs to be done to make tennis more
   inclusive for all members of the community!

      You can see the full open text on the research here but
   below is a photo of the ONE PAGE executive summary of this
   huge report!3

3. Storr, R, Richards, J & Curro, G 2020, Game on: LGBT+ inclusion
   in Australian tennis, Tennis Australia,
   <https://researchdirect.westernsydney.edu.au/islandora/object/
   uws:58017/>

                                                                        The marketing plan | 49
   A picture of an executive summary for a report on LGBT inclusion in
   tennis

   If you're still struggling with putting together your executive
   summary, don't worry, there are plenty of resources out there
   to help you. In addition to the research project executive
   summary I mentioned earlier, you should also check out the
   video below4 for more guidance on this section of your
   marketing plan. There is also more resources on the vUWS site
   to help you ahead of your assessment submission!

                        One or more interactive elements has been

4. Young Entrepreneurs Forum 2018, How to write an executive
   summary for your business plan?, 26 November, online video,
   <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PXoE2wMvTVE>
   50 | The marketing plan
                    excluded from this version of the text. You can
        view them online here:
        https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
        sportmarketing/?p=202#oembed-2

Background to the Plan

The background section explains why the marketing plan is
important for the sports organisation. It should also describe
what the plan covers and what the organisation wants to
achieve through its marketing efforts. What kinds of things
might you want to include in your "background" section of your
marketing plan?

   In order to paint a clear picture of the situation, it's important
to include specific information in the background section. For
example, you might include demographic data about the area,
such as information on the age, gender, education, income,
and cultural and social experiences of the people who live
there. Additionally, you could provide an overview of the values
of the sports teams in the area and how they align with or differ
from the values of the community they are located in.

   Data sets from sources such as the ABS can provide valuable
insights into the broader context of the environment (don't
worry we explore this in Week 6- Market research in the sport
industry). Information about community engagement and
how the sports teams in the area are involved in the
community, as well as how they are perceived by local
residents, is also important to include.

   By including all of this information in the background section
of your proposal, you create a comprehensive and well-

                                                                      The marketing plan | 51
   informed picture of the environment in which your strategy
   will be implemented. Having this clearly explained will provide
   a strong foundation for the rest of the proposal and helps to
   ensure that your strategy is data-driven and well-informed.

      In class this week we will segment Sydney into four sections
   Northern Sydney, Western Sydney, the Sutherland Shire and
   Sydney City! As the assessment instructions suggest, you will
   be assigned one area and a specific Rugby League team to
   form the basis of your marketing plan. Whilst we are drilling
   down into Sydney, Sydney itself has its own culture- have a
   look at this video by comedian Jimmy Rees5 for some insights
   before we head into class.

                       One or more interactive elements has been
                       excluded from this version of the text. You can
            view them online here:
            https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
            sportmarketing/?p=202#oembed-3

  Environmental Analysis

   The environmental analysis is all about understanding the
   factors that can impact the sports organisations marketing
   efforts. This includes looking at both internal and external
   factors, like the competition and the target market. A SWOT
   analysis and market research are also done as part of this step.

5. Rees, J 2023, Border Control for Sydney ... you wanna go in? ,
   8 February, online video, <https://www.youtube.com/
   watch?v=F_6EwCVpcsQ>.

   52 | The marketing plan
                        One or more interactive elements has been
                        excluded from this version of the text. You can
            view them online here:
            https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
            sportmarketing/?p=202#oembed-4

   As the above video6 explains, SWOT Analysis is a marketing
   tool that helps organisations identify and understand their
   strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats. It is a
   strategic method used to evaluate the internal and external
   factors that can impact a business. In the context of sports
   within Australia, a SWOT Analysis can help a sports
   organization determine its position in the market and identify
   areas for improvement. See below for a full breakdown that has
   been adapted to the definitions provided by Lee and Walsh
   (2011)7

6. SmartDraw 2018, SWOT analysis - What is SWOT? Definition,
   examples and how to do a SWOT analysis, 8 August, online
   video, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JXXHqM6RzZQ>

7. Adapted from Lee, S & Walsh, P 2011, 'SWOT and AHP hybrid
   model for sport marketing outsourcing using a case of
   intercollegiate sport', Sport Management Review, vol. 14, no. 4,
   pp. 361-9.

                                                                         The marketing plan | 53
                    An interactive H5P element has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view it online
        here:
        https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
        sportmarketing/?p=202#h5p-11

By conducting a SWOT Analysis, any sport team can get a
better understanding of its position in the market and identify
areas for improvement. This information can then be used to
develop a strategic plan that capitalises on the organisation's
strengths, addresses its weaknesses, takes advantage of
opportunities, and (understand) then minimises threats.

     Case Study: The argument for hosting events in Australia

                          One or more interactive elements has
                          been excluded from this version of the
              text. You can view them online here:
              https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
              sportmarketing/?p=202#oembed-5

        This week we will be debating in class using the
     SWOT tool to understand how hosting mega events,
     such as international sporting competitions or large-

54 | The marketing plan
         scale cultural festivals, can bring both positive and
         negative impacts to a region. It is important for you to
         understand and identify these impacts as they play a
         crucial role in decision making and event planning.
         Check out the above video8 for context

            Also, one of this weeks extended readings is by
         Kostas Karadakis et al. (2010) called Event leveraging of
         mega sport events: a SWOT analysis approach9.

   Marketing Objectives

    The marketing objectives section of a sports organisation's
    marketing plan serves as a crucial component in outlining the
    foundation for the entire marketing strategy. By establishing
    specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, and time-bound
    (SMART) goals 10, the organisation can effectively allocate its
    resources and efforts towards realising these objectives. Watch

 8. Sky News Australia 2023, `Petty' rivalry between states over
    hosting sporting events is `exhausting', 5 February, online
    video, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iI-P9FbLgbU>.

 9. Karadakis, K, Kaplanidou, K & Karlis, G 2010, 'Event leveraging
    of mega sport events: a SWOT analysis approach',
    International Journal of Event and Festival Management, vol.
    1, no. 3, pp. 170-85.

10. Da Silva, EC & Las Casas, AL 2017, 'Sports marketing plan: an
    alternative framework for sports club', International Journal of
    Marketing Studies, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 15-28.

                                                                          The marketing plan | 55
   the below video 11, noting we will be going through these more
   in class this week!

                        One or more interactive elements has been
                        excluded from this version of the text. You can
            view them online here:
            https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
            sportmarketing/?p=202#oembed-6

  Marketing Strategies

   The marketing strategies section of your marketing plan will
   outline the approach the sports organisation you have chosen
   will take to achieve its marketing objectives. This includes
   identifying the market segment and target market, figuring
   out what makes the organisation unique (its unique selling
   proposition to this market), and deciding how to promote and
   sell its products and services (the marketing mix). A good
   friend of ours Blair Hugh's has set up a website where he is
   tracking all the fun, exciting and unique marketing strategies
   of sport organisations all over the world - you can check out his
   website here .

      Next week, in Week 5 (Market segmentation and target
   marketing) we explore target marketing and marketing
   segments within the sports industry. This focus will enable for

11. Marr, B 2021, How to set SMART goals & objectives, 31 August,
   online video, <https://www.youtube.com/
   watch?v=pdPtuhZiSq4>.

    56 | The marketing plan
    you to be able to address this section of the marketing plan and
    understand how what you design and create needs to not only
    hit a brief, but hit a brief with a particular demographic.

  Resourcing Requirements

    The resourcing requirements section explains what resources
    the sports organisation will need to put its marketing plan into
    action. This could include things like a budget, personnel, and
    equipment.

       The budget is a vital resource that should be included in the
    resourcing requirements section. It should detail the cost of
    each marketing activity and the overall cost of the marketing
    plan, taking into account any potential cost overruns and
    contingencies. The budgeting process in sports marketing can
    have a big impact on the success of the marketing strategy.
    You need to get the resources they need and make decisions
    about how to allocate those resources among different
    marketing activities. To make sure the budget supports the
    marketing strategy, those responsible for the budget should
    understand how to use the organization's financial resources
    effectively. The budget should give priority to activities that
    support the strategy, but not waste resources by over-
    allocating funds. The budgeting process may also need to
    change in response to unexpected events or changes in
    strategy12.

       Personnel, both internal and external, are an important
    resource that should be considered. This section should outline
    the roles and responsibilities of each individual involved in
    executing the marketing plan.

12. Shank, MD & Lyberger, MR 2014, Sports marketing: A strategic
    perspective. Routledge, London.

                                                                          The marketing plan | 57
       Equipment and technology, such as data capturing
    software, hardware, and production equipment, should also be
    included in the resourcing requirements section. The section
    should specify the type and quantity of equipment required for
    each marketing activity.

       A timeline for implementation is also a critical resource,
    outlining the start and end dates for each marketing activity
    and the overall timeline for the marketing plan. This helps to
    ensure that the marketing plan is executed in a timely manner
    and that all activities are completed as scheduled.

       Have a watch of this video that explains "what's wrong with
    sports marketing" 13 from over 10 years ago. Let's see if the
    same "problems" still exists today?

                         One or more interactive elements has been
                         excluded from this version of the text. You can
             view them online here:
             https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
             sportmarketing/?p=202#oembed-7

    We will go through this is more detail in Week 10 (Sponsorship,
    corporate partnerships and sponsors) and Week 11
    (Community and Stakeholders), but keep these things at the
    back of your mind at the point of thinking about how you
    are going to market to your group. We encourage you to be
    ambitious - but you need to think about how much input will

  be required for your strategy to thrive!

13. Forbes 2011, Problems with sports marketing, 16 June, online
    video, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TEW648hPABI>

    58 | The marketing plan
Control and Evaluation

The control and evaluation section is the heart of any
marketing plan. Here's where the sports organization will track
its marketing success using metrics like ticket sales,
merchandise sales, sponsorship revenue, and ad campaign
effectiveness. With these results, the organization will tweak
its marketing plan to ensure it's on track to hit its goals. This
section is arguably the MOST crucial part of any marketing
plan. Why? Having clear, measurable objectives is key to
success. Find out more in Week 9 when we dive into
(Promotion and Sales).

Media Attributions

  · Hockey huddle © Jeffery F Lin on Unsplash
  · Executive summary: Game To Play: LGBT inclusion in

      Tennis © Ryan Storr, Jessica Richards and Gina Curro is
      licensed under a CC0 (Creative Commons Zero) license

                                                                     The marketing plan | 59
5. Market
segmentation and
target marketing in
sport

     Learning Objectives

          · To gain a comprehensive understanding of
             market segmentation and its practical
             application in the sports industry.

          · To develop the ability to critically evaluate the
             rationale behind the selection of a target market
             and the methods used to achieve it. This includes
             understanding the factors that influence target
             market selection, such as consumer needs,
             preferences, and behaviours.

          · To understand the different approaches to
             targeting a market, including concentrated
             marketing, undifferentiated marketing, and
             differentiated marketing. This includes an
             appreciation of the benefits and limitations of
             each approach, and the ability to evaluate the
             most appropriate approach for a given business
             or marketing situation.

60 | Market segmentation and target marketing in sport
Introduction

This week is all about understanding the key concepts of
identifying and reaching your desired audience (whatever that
looks like!) through tailored marketing strategies. We'll cover
the basics of market segmentation, including how to break
down consumer segments based on common characteristics
and behaviours, and how to use these segments to inform your
marketing efforts. We'll also delve into the different approaches
to targeting a market, including concentrated marketing,
undifferentiated marketing, and differentiated marketing, and
explore the pros and cons of each approach.

                    One or more interactive elements has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You can
        view them online here:
        https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
        sportmarketing/?p=99#oembed-1

What is market segmentation?

Market segmentation is the process of dividing a market of
sport consumers into smaller groups of consumers with similar
characteristics, needs or behaviour. The goal of sport consumer
segmentation is to identify high yield segments - that is, those
segments that are likely to be the most profitable or that have
growth potential - and then target them effectively with the
appropriate products, services or marketing campaigns.

                     Market segmentation and target marketing in sport | 61
           There are many ways to segment sport
           consumers, such as:

Check      1. Demographic segmentation: This involves
out this       dividing sport consumers into groups based
article!

           on characteristics such as age, gender,
           income, and education1.

           2. Geographic segmentation: This involves

   The          dividing sport consumers into groups based
changin
g face of       on where they live, such as by region, city or
the             neighbourhood2.
Parram
atta Eels  3. Behavioural segmentation: This involves
fan base
                dividing sport consumers into groups based

                on their behaviour, such as how often they

                watch sports, how often they purchase

                sport-related products or services, or what
                types of sports they are interested in3.

           4. Psychographic segmentation: This involves

dividing sport consumers into groups based on their
lifestyle, values, personality, and interests4.

1. Adapted from Brochado, A, Cristovao Verissimo, JM & de
   Oliveira, JCL 2022, 'Memorable tourism experiences, perceived
   value dimensions and behavioral intentions: A demographic
   segmentation approach, Tourism Review, vol. 77, no. 6, pp.
   1472-86.

2. Adapted from Funk, DC, Alexandris, K & McDonald, H 2022,
   'Sport consumer research and segmentation', in Sport
   Consumer Behaviour, Routledge, London, pp. 49-71.

3. Adapted from Funk, DC, Alexandris, K & McDonald, H 2022,
   'Sport consumer research and segmentation', in Sport
   Consumer Behaviour, Routledge, London, pp. 49-71.

4. Funk, DC, Alexandris, K & McDonald, H 2022, 'Sport consumer
   research and segmentation', in Sport Consumer Behaviour,

   62 | Market segmentation and target marketing in sport
    5. Loyalty segmentation: This involves dividing sport
         consumers into groups based on their loyalty to a team,
         league or brand5.

  6. Benefit segmentation: This involves
      dividing sport consumers into groups
      based on the benefits they seek from
      consuming sports, such as
      entertainment, socialization, or self-
      improvement6.

  Once a market is segmented, the sport
  organisation can develop specific
  marketing strategies and programs to
  target these segments, which will
  increase the chances of success. Let's
  have a listen to Jeffrey Burner7 about
  market segmentation to provide further
  details into this important aspect of
  sports marketing.

   Routledge, London, pp. 49-71.
5. Adapted from Funk, DC, Alexandris, K & McDonald, H 2022,

   'Sport consumer research and segmentation', in Sport
   Consumer Behaviour, Routledge, London, pp. 49-71.
6. Adapted from Funk, DC, Alexandris, K & McDonald, H 2022,
   'Sport consumer research and segmentation', in Sport
   Consumer Behaviour, Routledge, London, pp. 49-71.
7. Burner, J 2020, Sports Marketing Unit 3 Module 2- Market
   Segments, 9 September, online video,
   <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rnz1o_Pys9Y>.

                        Market segmentation and target marketing in sport | 63
                    One or more interactive elements has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You can
        view them online here:
        https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
        sportmarketing/?p=99#oembed-2

Understanding market segmentation in sport is important
because it allows sport organisations to identify specific groups
of consumers with similar needs and characteristics, and tailor
their marketing strategies and tactics to effectively reach and
engage those groups. By segmenting the market, sport
organisations can more effectively target their advertising,
promotions, and other marketing efforts, which can ultimately
lead to increased sales and revenue. Additionally, market
segmentation can also help sport organisations to better
understand their customers and develop more personalised
and effective products and services that meet the specific
needs and preferences of different segments of the market.

      Case Study: Market Segmentation for an
   E-Sports Streaming Platform

        Case Study: Market Segmentation for an E-Sports
     Streaming Platform

        Background Information: Oz-E-Sports Inc. (please a

64 | Market segmentation and target marketing in sport
round of applause for this pun!) is a new e-sports
streaming platform that is set to launch in Australia in
the winter sports seasons. The company wants to
establish itself as a major player in the e-sports
streaming industry by providing high-quality content
and user-friendly features. However, the e-sports
streaming market is highly competitive, and the
company wants to ensure that its marketing efforts are
targeted to the right audience.

   What is the problem? Oz-E-Sports Stream Inc. wants
to segment its market in order to identify the most
profitable segments and target its marketing efforts
accordingly.

   What can they do? Oz-E-Sports Inc. decides to
conduct market research to gather information about
the e-sports streaming market. This will include
gathering information on potential users of their
platform including;

    · Demographics: Age, gender, income,
        education, etc.

    · Geographic: Location, region, etc.
    · Behavioural: Frequency of e-sports watching,

        types of games watched, etc.
    · Psychographic: Lifestyle, values, personality,

        interests, etc.

   Based on the research, the company segments the
market into the following groups:

   1. Segment 1: Casual e-sports viewers (ages 18-24,
        mostly male, low income, and live in Western
        Sydney, )

              Market segmentation and target marketing in sport | 65
        2. Segment 2: Hardcore e-sports viewers (ages
             25-35, mostly male, high income, and live in
             Sydney City)

        3. Segment 3:[Emerging market] Female e-sports
             viewers (ages 18-35, mostly female, varying
             income levels, and live in both Western Sydney
             and Sydney City)

                          An interactive H5P element has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You
              can view it online here:
              https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
              sportmarketing/?p=99#h5p-7

We have discussed just a few examples of the many factors
that can affect sport consumption behaviour. It's important to
note that the significance and impact of these factors may
vary depending on the individual, the context, and the specific
product or service being consumed. That's why in class this
week we will look at the different types of sport consumers and
factors that may influence their consumption of sport gear and
apply it to the following case study.

          Simply, market segmentation is when a market is
       split into smaller groups of people with similar
       needs or characteristics. The goal is to find the most

66 | Market segmentation and target marketing in sport
           profitable or growing groups, and then target those
           groups with specific marketing efforts.

   So once we have decided on a way to segment our
   customers - what next? The answer is: to target your market
   segment!!

  What is target marketing?

   Target marketing is when the marketing is focused on a
   specific group of consumers that have been identified through
   market segmentation. This is done by making the marketing
   mix appeal to that specific group of people. Target marketing
   in sport consumers is the process of identifying specific
   segments of sport consumers that are likely to be the most
   profitable or have growth potential, and then tailoring
   marketing efforts to effectively reach and appeal to those
   segments8.

      For example, a sport organisation might conduct market
   research and identify that a specific segment of sport
   consumers are young, affluent, and highly engaged with social
   media. To target this segment, the organisation might develop
   a marketing strategy that emphasises the use of social media
   platforms to reach and engage with these consumers. This
   could include creating engaging and shareable content,
   running social media advertising campaigns, and leveraging

8. Reihani, E & Khatibzadeh, M 2021, 'Marketing mix in sport
   tourism context', Journal of New Studies in Sport
   Management, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 247-55.

                        Market segmentation and target marketing in sport | 67
   influencers and ambassadors who are popular among this
   target segment.

        Active Sport Tourists: Millennials vs Baby
      Boomers

           A study by Ruth IJspeert and Gilda Hernandez-
        Maskivker (2020)9 found differences between the
        millennial and baby boomer active sport tourists in
        terms of social-economic characteristics, with baby
        boomers being mostly male, having a higher education
        level, and a higher income, while millennials were more
        female, had a higher education level, and a lower
        income.

9. IJspeert, R & Hernandez-Maskivker, G 2020, 'Active sport
   tourists: Millennials vs baby boomers', Journal of Tourism,
   Heritage & Services Marketing (JTHSM), vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 12-20.
   68 | Market segmentation and target marketing in sport
      Woman jumping while on a hike

        Additionally, differences were found in motivations
     for active sport tourism, with millennials being more
     motivated by thrill and sensation, overcoming
     challenges, and adrenalin, while baby boomers were
     more motivated by health-related activities. These
     differences are important for tourism practitioners to
     take into consideration when creating marketing
     strategies and offering products that match the needs
     of these different segments.

It's important to note that targeting specific segments of sport
consumers requires a deep understanding of their
characteristics, needs, and behaviour. Market research and
data analysis are crucial tools that can help sport organizations
identify and understand these segments, and develop effective

marketing strategies to target them In simple terms,

                    Market segmentation and target marketing in sport | 69
market segmentation is about finding
groups of consumers in a market, and
target marketing is about using specific
strategies to reach those groups.

      Classroom Case Study: Targeting Sport
   Consumers in Parramatta

        Background: Peter Wynn Score (a sports retail
     company) is a small business that specialises in selling
     sport-related products such as equipment, clothing,
     and accessories. The company has been in business for
     several years, but has struggled to generate significant
     profits. The company is located in Parramatta with a
     population of around 250,000 people, and has a limited
     budget for marketing and advertising.

        What is the problem? Peter Wynn Score wants to
     increase its sales and profits by targeting sport
     consumers more effectively. However, the company
     does not have a clear understanding of who its target
     consumers are, or how to reach them.

        What can they do? Peter Wynn Score conducts
     market research to gain a better understanding of its
     target consumers. The research includes a survey, as
     well as focus group with consumers who have
     purchased sport-related products from the company in
     the past.

70 | Market segmentation and target marketing in sport
            The survey results show that the majority of sport
         consumers are from Parramatta and that they are
         male, between the ages of 18 and 35, and have an
         average income of around $70,000 per year. The
         research also shows that the most popular sports in
         Parramatta are rugby league, football, and basketball.

            The focus group interviews reveal that this group of
         sport consumers in Parramatta value convenience,
         quality, and good customer service when purchasing
         sport-related products. They also prefer to shop at
         stores that have a wide selection of products and
         knowledgeable staff.

            Solution?
                                  Let's discuss this in class!

   Choosing the right strategy

    Any sports organisation must now carefully consider its
    approach to targeting its market and determine the most
    appropriate marketing strategy to use. Choosing the right
    marketing approach is crucial for the success of the
    organisation, as it can directly impact its ability to reach and
    engage its target audience. The options available include
    concentrated marketing, undifferentiated marketing, and
    differentiated marketing, each with its own unique approach
    and benefits10. The organisation must assess its target market

10. Adapted from Hofacker, M 2022, 'What is differentiated
    marketing, concentrated, and undifferentiated marketing?', 21

                          Market segmentation and target marketing in sport | 71
   and determine the strategy that will best meet its needs and
   effectively communicate its value proposition to its target
   audience.

                        An interactive H5P element has been excluded
                        from this version of the text. You can view it online
            here:
            https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
            sportmarketing/?p=99#h5p-8

              Here are some examples of each11;
              Concentrated marketing can be seen in a small
           surf brand targeting the niche market of surfers in
           the Byron Bay region of Australia. The brand focuses
           on providing high-quality surf gear specifically for
           this group.
              Undifferentiated marketing is demonstrated by a
           large supermarket chain offering a generic range of

   November, ReferralRock, <https://referralrock.com/blog/
   differentiated-concentrated-undifferentiated-marketing/>.
11. Adapted from Hofacker, M 2022, 'What is differentiated
   marketing, concentrated, and undifferentiated marketing?', 21
   November, ReferralRock, <https://referralrock.com/blog/
   differentiated-concentrated-undifferentiated-marketing/>.

    72 | Market segmentation and target marketing in sport
       sports equipment for all types of sports, appealing
       to a wide range of customers.

          Differentiated marketing can be illustrated by a
       sports nutrition company offering different products
       for specific sports, such as protein bars for
       bodybuilders, hydration drinks for runners, and
       recovery shakes for soccer players. The company
       segments its target market based on the nutritional
       needs of each sport, resulting in more specialised
       and effective marketing.

Now you have a go?

                    An interactive H5P element has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view it online
        here:
        https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
        sportmarketing/?p=99#h5p-9

To wrap up this week

Market segmentation and target marketing are essential
components of a marketing strategy. Market segmentation
divides the market into specific groups based on common
characteristics and behaviours, allowing for more effective
targeting. Target marketing involves selecting a particular
segment to focus marketing efforts on, with the goal of

                    Market segmentation and target marketing in sport | 73
effectively reaching and engaging the target audience. By
using these techniques, a business can tailor its marketing
efforts to reach its desired customer base and achieve its
marketing objectives.

   We then explored the three strategies (concentrated,
undifferentiated and differentiated). It is important to note
that each approach has its own advantages and disadvantages,
and the choice of which approach to use will depend on the
business's goals, resources, and target market. By
understanding the relationship between these concepts,
businesses can make informed decisions on how to effectively
target and reach their desired customers.

Media Attributions

  · Woman jumping while on a hike © Peter Conlan

74 | Market segmentation and target marketing in sport
6. Market research in
the sport industry

     Learning Objectives

          · Define market research and explain its
             importance in the context of sports marketing.

          · Analyse different market research methods
             used in the sports industry, such as focus groups
             and interviews, and understand how to apply
             these methods effectively.

          · Evaluate the benefits and limitations of using
             market research to inform sports marketing
             strategies.

          · Analyse how sports organisations can use data
             to make informed decisions, such as analysing
             customer demographics, preferences, and
             behaviour.

          · Understand the concept of customer
             relationship management (CRM) and its
             relationship with sports marketing.

Introduction

Sports marketing is a highly competitive industry where

                                           Market research in the sport industry | 75
success depends on effectively reaching and engaging with
a large and loyal fan base. To achieve this, market research
and data analytics are crucial tools to help sports marketers
understand their target audience and develop effective
marketing strategies. While last week we discussed market
segmentation and target marketing, it's important to
understand how fans perceive a sports brand.

   This week we will emphasise the significance of market
research and data analytics in sports marketing and how they
can provide a competitive advantage. While you are already
exploring these concepts in the Fundamental of Marketing
Analytics unit, we will delve deeper and apply them specifically
to the sports industry.

                    One or more interactive elements has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You can
        view them online here:
        https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
        sportmarketing/?p=171#oembed-1

What is market research?

Market research encompasses various components beyond
just telemarketing and focus groups in the new age of digital
fan engagement. Sports organisations can use market
research to gain a deeper understanding of their customers
(fans), their environment, and the values that are significant to
them.

   There are numerous ways that market research can assist

76 | Market research in the sport industry
  sports organisations. Watch the following video1 to get some
  insights into how some companies have used market research
  to better position their brand in competitive markets.

                       One or more interactive elements has been
                       excluded from this version of the text. You can
           view them online here:
           https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
           sportmarketing/?p=171#oembed-2

                Now let's test your knowledge on this video!

                       An interactive H5P element has been excluded
                       from this version of the text. You can view it online
           here:
           https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
           sportmarketing/?p=171#h5p-13

  So that is interesting for non-sports brands but what are
  some of the most common ways sport clubs gather
  information from their fans?

     · Focus Groups: Focus groups are always a collective of
        people (more than 2 people who are usually sat together)

1. Attest 2022, How TOP brands use market research - with
  examples!, 14 January, online video,
  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HtPCyQaMeu8>.

                                              Market research in the sport industry | 77
         and asked their opinions on a topic.

   According to Caroline Oates and Panayiota Alevizou (2018), the
   three types of focus groups that can be used by the sports
   marketing team to understand their fans better are
   unstructured focus groups, exploratory focus groups, and
   semi-structured focus groups. Focus groups are where a

  bunch of fans (can either be from a particular
  segment or just random) sit in a room and are asked

   questions about their thoughts and experiences2.

                       An interactive H5P element has been excluded
                       from this version of the text. You can view it online
            here:
            https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
            sportmarketing/?p=171#h5p-12

     · Interviews: Interviews are valuable for sport marketers to
         gain insights into the thoughts and perceptions of their
         fan base, especially when focusing on specific segments
         such as female fans under 30, to understand their
         perspectives on their club or interest in sports.

   However, interviewing fans is tricky (trust me I know) and to
   ensure you get the most out of the interview it is important to
   know how to ask the right questions! Let's look at a research
   study conducted by Ron Garland and others who wanted to

2. Oates, C & Alevizou, P 2018, Conducting focus groups for
   Business and Management students, SAGE, London.

   78 | Market research in the sport industry
   know why NZ Rugby Union had declined - in a similar fashion
   to the decline of Rugby Union in Australia3.

      Here is some context for you.4.

                        One or more interactive elements has been
                        excluded from this version of the text. You can
            view them online here:
            https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
            sportmarketing/?p=171#oembed-3

   You will find a full copy of their research in this weeks extended
   readings but basically the researchers wanted to find out two
   things;

     1. To identify issues that influence New Zealand provincial
         rugby union spectators to attend professional provincial
         rugby events.

    2. To identify the differential influence of these issues upon
         different groups of fans with a view to adopting
         segmentation strategies for subsequent marketing effort.

   Through interviewing 150 fans they found that most important
   factor influencing attendance was the live sport action itself.
   However, other factors such as stadium conditions,

3. Garland, R, Macpherson, T & Haughey, K 2004, 'Rugby fan
   attraction factors', Marketing Bulletin, vol. 15, article 3.

4. ABC News Australia 2021, What went wrong? A look at the
   state of Rugby Union | The Drum, 5 March, online video,
   <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6HfuC-XefFs>.

                                               Market research in the sport industry | 79
   atmosphere, and community involvement, affected different
   fan groups differently, indicating targeted marketing tactics
   may encourage home game attendance5.

             Imagine you are the head of marketing for NZ
          Rugby Union - what might you do with this
          information? What would be your next steps? What
          other ways could you understand this issue?

  Data Diving

   Sports organisations can utilise a vast amount of data to inform
   their marketing strategies. Unlike interviews and focus groups,
   the collection and analysis of big data can provide a holistic
   picture of the market. This can include broad demographic
   information from sources like ABS data (Australian Bureau of
   Statistics) or more specific data gleaned from fan engagement
   with the sports organisation's app, website, ticketing, and
   membership purchases.

5. Garland, R, Macpherson, T & Haughey, K 2004, 'Rugby fan
   attraction factors', Marketing Bulletin, vol. 15, article 3.
   80 | Market research in the sport industry
   Computer screen showing data

   Sports organisations can use different types of data to help
   guide their marketing strategies. Data can come from a variety
   of sources, such as fan engagement, demographic information,
   and data from Ausplay, which shows what sports people enjoy
   and how much they are moving. This information can be
   helpful for teams to grow their brand exposure and make sure
   they have fans for a long time, not just attending games.

      Remember- having strong junior numbers is important for
   the financial success of sports teams, so it's essential to
   improve the teams reach at the grassroots level. Using data in
   these ways can help sports organisations stay competitive and
   successful. Have a look at the most recent AUSPLAY report
   (click the link here)6 and answer the following questions.

6. Australian Sports Commission 2022, AUSPLAYTM: National

                                               Market research in the sport industry | 81
                       An interactive H5P element has been excluded
                       from this version of the text. You can view it online
            here:
            https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
            sportmarketing/?p=171#h5p-16

   Sports organisations can also collect data from their own
   platforms, such as their website, app, and ticketing system.
   This data includes information about who downloads their app,
   purchases tickets and merchandise, and who is reading news
   about player signings. For paid members of a sports team, it
   is likely they may receive targeted emails about special tickets
   and discounts or personalised messages. For example, every
   year I receive an email from Everton Football Club wishing me
   a happy birthday! This data helps sport organisations to better
   understand their audience and create targeted marketing
   campaigns.

      But it goes further...
      Have a read of the article linked here called How The Patriots
   Use Data To Try To Improve The Fan Experience7
      As the above article explains, the New England Patriots, a
   professional American football team, have a team of data
   experts called the Kraft Analytics Group (KAGR) who collect
   data about their fans' behaviours. They track fan purchases,

   sport and physical activity participation report: November
   2022, Australian Government Publishing Service, Canberra.
7. Springer, S 2016, 'How the Patriots use data to try to improve
   the fan experience', 22 December, wbur: Morning Edition,
   <https://www.wbur.org/morningedition/2016/12/22/kraft-
   analytics-group>.

   82 | Market research in the sport industry
   ticket sales, email responses, and even parking lot attendance
   to understand their customers and improve their fan
   experience. KAGR's data helps the Patriots make better
   decisions about game-day staffing, stadium improvements,
   and ticket prices. The team can also use this data to forecast
   when fans will arrive at the stadium and how many will show
   up for each game. KAGR even tracks which fans are missing
   games and why which means the Patriots can use this
   information to build stronger relationships with their fans.
   While some people might be concerned about the team
   collecting so much information, the Patriots say it's a way to
   serve their fans better.

  What is CRM and it relationship with
  market research in sport?

   In this weeks additional reading Fried and Mumcu (2016) offers
   you a detailed explanation of what analytics in sports
   marketing can look like. They argue that the goal of sports
   marketing is to attract individuals to games and events, but
   being a fan does not always convert individuals into loyal
   attendees8. Think about your own fandom - are you a fan of a
   club possibly overseas where you don't necessarily attend the
   games or a fan of your local team but rarely make it to live
   games?

      We know that the challenge for sport marketers is to convert
   fans into long-term loyal customers who are active in their
   consumption of tickets and other sport related items. Fried

8. Fried, G & Mumcu, C (eds) 2016, Sport analytics: A data-driven
   approach to sport business and management, Routledge,
   London.

                                               Market research in the sport industry | 83
    and Mumca (2016) explains that customer relationship
    management (CRM) then becomes a crucial tool for successful
    sport organisations to engage with their customers effectively
    by sending the right message, to the right person, at the right
    time via the right platform.

       Mumca in her chapter on analytics in sports marketing
    argues that CRM systems provide a comprehensive view of
    an organisation's customer base via information technology
    systems9. Whilst this is a HUGE topic and you don't need to
    know the intricacies of operating systems it is important to
    understand how CRM is increasingly becoming one of the
    most important tools for sports teams to use to hit the mark
    with their fans!

                         One or more interactive elements has been
                         excluded from this version of the text. You can
             view them online here:
             https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
             sportmarketing/?p=171#oembed-4

    As the above video10 explores, Customer Relationship
    Management (CRM) and analytics are both important
    components of sports organisations. CRM refers to the
    processes and technologies used by sports teams to manage

 9. Mumcu, C 2016, 'Analytics in sport marketing', in G Fried & and
    C Mumca (eds), Sport Analytics, Routledge, London, pp. 113-36.

10. Salesforce 2021, What is CRM and how does it work?, 24
    March, online video, <https://www.youtube.com/
    watch?v=SlhESAKF1Tk>.

     84 | Market research in the sport industry
   and analyse their interactions with fans and customers, while
   analytics involves the collection, processing, and analysis of
   data to derive insights and make informed decisions11.

      So the relationship is simple! In the sports industry, analytics
   is used to build on a sports team CRM strategies by providing
   teams with a better understanding of their fans and customers.
   By analysing data from sources such as ticket sales, social
   media, and online engagement, teams can gain insights into
   their customers' behaviours and preferences. This information
   can then be used to tailor marketing campaigns and improve
   the overall customer experience, ultimately leading to
   increased revenue and fan engagement.

      Therefore successful sport organisations practice CRM as a
   business philosophy and use data analytics to understand
   their fans in great detail to build deeper long-term
   relationships and add value.

  Media Attributions

      · Computer screen showing data © Carlos Muza

11. Kim, KT, Kwak, DH & Kim, YK 2010, 'The impact of cause-related
   marketing (CRM) in spectator sport', Journal of Management
   & Organization, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 515-27.
                                               Market research in the sport industry | 85
7. Sports marketing in
an omnichannel world

     Learning Objectives

          · Define sports marketing and explain how it has
             evolved in the context of an omnichannel world.

          · Analyse the differences between traditional
             marketing and omnichannel marketing in the
             context of sports marketing.

          · Understand the concept of an omnichannel
             approach and how it can be used to create a
             cohesive and seamless customer experience
             across multiple channels.

          · Understand how case studies of successful
             omnichannel sports marketing campaigns can
             lead to better outcomes for the commercial sports
             market.

Introduction

In today's fast-paced and ever-changing business landscape,
marketers face new challenges and opportunities to connect
with their customers like never before. With the rise of digital
technologies, consumers have become more empowered and

86 | Sports marketing in an omnichannel world
   demanding, expecting seamless and personalised experiences
   across multiple channels.

                       One or more interactive elements has been
                       excluded from this version of the text. You can
            view them online here:
            https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
            sportmarketing/?p=167#oembed-1

   Omnichannel marketing is founded on the understanding that
   modern consumers frequently switch between various
   channels during a single transaction. These channels include
   retail stores, computers, smartphones, tablets, in-store kiosks,
   and social media sites1. Both customers and sports
   organisations utilise these channels and touchpoints regularly,
   interchangeably, and simultaneously2.

      In the context of purchasing sports merchandise,
   omnichannel marketing enables customers to utilise various
   channels and devices throughout the entire buying process.
   This process typically involves discovering the product,
   researching relevant information, making a purchase,

1. Berman, B & Thelen, S 2018, 'Planning and implementing an
   effective omnichannel marketing program', International
   Journal of Retail & Distribution Management, vol. 46, no. 7, pp.
   598-614.

2. Verhoef, PC, Kannan, PK & Inman, JJ 2015, 'From multi-channel
   retailing to omni-channel retailing: Introduction to the special
   issue on multi-channel retailing', Journal of Retailing, vol. 91,
   no. 2, pp. 174-81.

                                     Sports marketing in an omnichannel world | 87
completing payment, receiving the order, and handling
product returns.

          As an example, a customer could use an iPad to
       preview a Sydney Sixers cricket jersey, a computer
       with multiple screens to compare prices and read
       product reviews, a smartphone to make a credit card
       payment while physically in a store, and then
       arrange for in-store pickup or return, as well as
       receiving instructions about the product at the
       nearby store. Omnichannel marketing empowers
       customers to tailor their purchasing experience
       according to their preferences and needs, allowing
       them to switch seamlessly between channels to
       complete their desired outcome. This is very
       important for the sports industry, whether it is
       buying the latest jersey or purchasing tickets to their
       teams match!

Traditional marketing vs omni-channel
marketing

As we have already discussed, marketing is about creating,
communicating, delivering, and exchanging products or
services that are valuable to customers, clients, partners, and
society. Throughout history, marketing was mostly the same
until radio, television, and billboard advertising made it
possible to reach more people. Now, with the internet and
mobile devices, marketing has changed even more, allowing
companies to connect with many more people using advanced
tools and techniques.

88 | Sports marketing in an omnichannel world
      Today, sport companies must make sure they tailor their
   marketing strategies to reach their customers. This means that
   they need to provide a seamless and personalised experience
   for consumers across all channels and devices, whether they
   use a physical store, an online website, a mobile app, or social
   media. It's important to make sure that customers have a
   consistent experience, no matter how they engage with a
   company.

      To make this happen, sport companies must understand
   what their customers want and need and make sure that they
   can provide a consistent and seamless experience across all
   channels. As we discussed last week in Week 6 (Market
   research in the sport industry), this involves doing research
   and thinking about the customer's point of view and
   integrating the customer experience across all channels to
   create a seamless and consistent experience.

      Overall, omni-channel marketing requires a deep
   understanding of consumer behaviour, preferences, and
   needs, and a commitment to delivering a seamless and
   personalised experience that exceeds their expectations.

        In focus: Nike

           Have a read of the following articles;

             · Nike Is Setting The Standard For Omnichannel
                Loyalty In Every Industry3.

3. Forrester 2019, 'Nike Is setting the standard for omnichannel
   loyalty in every industry', Forbes, 26 December,

                                     Sports marketing in an omnichannel world | 89
             · Nike goes the distance with omni-channel
                 retail transformation4.

           Nike has developed a loyalty program called NikePlus
        that is an essential part of its direct-to-customer
        growth strategy. Members of the program, which has
        over 170 million people, get benefits for shopping and
        using Nike's apps. Nike's approach to loyalty is different
        from other brands because it emphasises exclusivity,
        access, and innovation, rather than just offering
        discounts.

           Nike also brings the member experience to life in its
        stores with express checkout, special store hours for
        members, and a members-only floor at its flagship
        store in New York City. The company is also using data
        from the program (remember last week!) to enhance
        the value it provides to members. Nike's success with
        the program shows how important it is for companies
        to provide a consistent and personalized experience
        across all channels and devices that their customers
        use, whether it's in-store, online, or via mobile.

           This is a good example of omni-channel marketing,
        and it is becoming increasingly important for sport

   <https://www.forbes.com/sites/forrester/2019/12/26/nike-is-
   setting-the-standard-for-omnichannel-loyalty-in-every-
   industry/?sh=3ed249cb1ebb>.
4. Lauchlan, S 2019, 'Nike goes the distance with omni-channel
   retail transformation', Diginomica, 4 July,
   <https://diginomica.com/nike-goes-distance-omni-channel-
   retail-transformation>.

   90 | Sports marketing in an omnichannel world
        related companies to implement to remain
        competitive in the modern business landscape.

                             One or more interactive elements has
                             been excluded from this version of the
                  text. You can view them online here:
                  https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
                  sportmarketing/?p=167#oembed-2

           Watching this video5 and reading the article
        consider the following questions

             · How does Nike's approach to omnichannel
                marketing help it stand out from other retailers,
                and what can other companies learn from Nike's
                strategy?

             · What role do data and analytics play in Nike's
                omnichannel marketing strategy, and how does
                the company use them to deliver a more
                personalized experience to its customers?

             · How might Nike's approach to loyalty and
                membership change in the future, and what
                impact could this have on its business?

5. Advertising TV 2017, Introducing NikePlus Unlocks - Nike, 26
   November, online video, <https://www.youtube.com/
   watch?v=lzJF6Hml09c>.

                                      Sports marketing in an omnichannel world | 91
             · How does Nike balance the need for exclusivity
                 and innovation with the goal of providing a
                 consistent experience for all customers, regardless
                 of the channel or device they use?

             · How can smaller businesses and startups
                 incorporate elements of Nike's omnichannel
                 marketing strategy into their own marketing
                 plans?

   In one of this weeks additional reading Maximising
   Sponsorship ROI in an Omni-Channel World6 the authors
   work through some examples of omni-channel marketing in
   sport.

      As the authors note, omni-channel marketing is the practice
   of creating a seamless and integrated experience for
   customers across all channels. It means that customers can
   move between different platforms, such as a sports team's
   website, their social media profiles, and a physical store, while
   still experiencing a cohesive and consistent message. One
   successful example of omni-channel marketing is when
   NASCAR drivers interact directly with fans on platforms like
   Facebook Live.

      This has resulted in higher engagement and delivered a
   younger audience. NASCAR has also partnered with Twitter to
   create fun, interactive content, including The Hashtag 500, a
   NASCAR fan race on Twitter. During the DAYTONA 500, fans
   were able to use DAYTONA 500-themed emojis and a Snapchat

6. Scott, N 2017 'Maximising sponsorship ROI in an omni-channel
   world', Journal of Digital & Social Media Marketing, vol. 4, no.
   4, pp. 318-28.

   92 | Sports marketing in an omnichannel world
   live story was created, resulting in significant social media
   engagement.

                                                                                            Photo of
                                                                                            two race
                                                                                            cars with
                                                                                            fans

   The NASCAR Mobile App is another key part of their omni-
   channel strategy. This app features race highlights and lifestyle
   content for all three national racing series, allowing fans to
   access the latest news and media experiences with greater
   multimedia support. Through digital and social media,
   NASCAR has been able to engage core fans while also reaching
   new audiences and introducing them to the sport.

      Their social channels have amassed 11 million followers and
   1.9 billion social impressions in 20167. By utilising a data-driven
   approach (remember last weeks insights!) and understanding
   the roles of each platform, sports marketers can successfully
   win over the crowd and create lasting connections with their
   fans.

  Take a closer look with this weeks second

7. Scott, N 2017, 'Maximising sponsorship ROI in an omni-channel
   world', Journal of Digital & Social Media Marketing, vol. 4., no.
   4, pp. 318-28

                                     Sports marketing in an omnichannel world | 93
  reading

   The second assigned reading for this week is on vUWS (titled:
   What omnichannel really means?) provides a detailed and
   comprehensive explanation of the practical application of
   omni-channel marketing.8.

      The article emphasises the importance of supporting
   customers in one channel through another, for instance,
   enabling them to place online orders and collect their products
   in-store, especially outside regular business hours. It stresses
   the importance of supporting customers in one channel
   through another, for instance, enabling them to place online
   orders and collect their products in-store, especially outside
   regular business hours.

      The author also argues that retailers should offer support
   for returns and exchanges of products purchased online at
   their brick-and-mortar stores. I recommend reading this short
   article carefully and attempting to answer the questions
   provided9. The authors argue that retailers should offer support
   for returns and exchanges of products purchased online at
   their brick-and-mortar stores- has this ever happened to you?
   It can be very frustrating.

      After reading this short article (again it is on vUWS)
   carefully and attempting to fill in the right answers below to
   check your understanding of this weeks content.

8. This weeks reading is Akter, S, Hossain, TMT & Strong, C 2021,
   'What omnichannel really means?', Journal of Strategic
   Marketing, vol. 29, no. 7, pp. 567-73.

9. Akter, S, Hossain, TMT & Strong, C 2021, 'What omnichannel
   really means?', Journal of Strategic Marketing, vol. 29, no. 7, pp.
   567-73.

   94 | Sports marketing in an omnichannel world
                    An interactive H5P element has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view it online
        here:
        https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
        sportmarketing/?p=167#h5p-17

Media Attributions

  · Photo of two race cars with fans © Tim Trad

                                  Sports marketing in an omnichannel world | 95
8. Managing a sports
brand

     Learning Objectives

          · Define the concept of a sport brand and explain
             its importance to sport marketing.

          · Analyse the various components of the BILP
             model and how it applies to sport marketing.

          · Assess the effectiveness of case studies sport
             branding and marketing campaigns.

          · Explain the concept of ambush marketing and
             its potential impact on sport organisations and
             official sponsors.

Introduction: What is a sports brand?

A sports brand is a brand or a company that specialises in
producing and selling sport-related products such as
sportswear, equipment, accessories, and nutrition products.
Sports brands are typically associated with a particular sport or

96 | Managing a sports brand
  type of sport, and may also sponsor teams, events, and athletes
  to promote their products and gain exposure1

                       One or more interactive elements has been
                       excluded from this version of the text. You can
           view them online here:
           https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
           sportmarketing/?p=106#oembed-1

  Examples of sports brands include Nike, Adidas, Puma, Under
  Armour, and Reebok. These brands design, manufacture and
  distribute a wide range of sportswear and equipment for
  different sports such as running, soccer, basketball, and many
  more. They also sponsor major teams, events and athletes in
  many sports like Football, Basketball, Tennis and many more.

     Sports brands may also use different marketing strategies to
  attract and retain customers. As we have discussed last week
  this can include using social media and digital marketing,
  sponsoring teams and events, and creating engaging and
  shareable content to promote their products and build brand
  awareness. In short, a sports brand is a company that creates,
  sells and promotes sport-related products and services, and
  often has a strong connection to a particular sport or sports
  culture.

1. Kunkel, T & Biscaia, R 2020, 'Sport brands: Brand relationships
  and consumer behavior', Sport Marketing Quarterly, vol. 29, no.
  1, pp. 3-17.

                                                               Managing a sports brand | 97
  Let's look at this a bit closer: Manchester
  United

   An example of a sport organisation that has a strong "brand"
   is Manchester United Football Club, one of the most successful
   and recognised football clubs in the world (though not as good
   as Everton Football Club obviously!). Manchester United's
   brand is built on its rich history, success on the field, and a
   global fan base that spans all countries!

      The club has a distinctive visual identity, which includes a red
   devil logo and a red and white colour scheme, and a messaging
   platform that emphasises its heritage, winning culture, and
   global reach. The club also has a strong activation strategy
   through its merchandise sales, fan engagement, and
   sponsorship deals. They also have built a museum in the
   stadium so fans can have insight into the club and its rich
   history. Have a watch of the following video2 where the
   commentator discusses the "brand" value of Manchester
   United.

                       One or more interactive elements has been
                       excluded from this version of the text. You can
            view them online here:
            https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
            sportmarketing/?p=106#oembed-2

2. Interbrand 2016, Interbrand's Global CEO examines the
   Manchester United brand on CNN, 27 May, online video,
   <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YuvgKpzcBgQ>.

   98 | Managing a sports brand
   This weeks the additional reading is focused on Manchester
   United. In this 2006 article titled Globalisation and sports
   branding: the case of Manchester United3.

      John Hill and John Vincent outline why the club has been
   able to be such a global powerhouse through discussing their
   impact under four headings: the brand as a product, the
   brand as an organization, the brand as a person, and the
   brand as a symbol. All brands are part of broader product
   classes that define the parameters within which the brand
   operates4

      After reading this academic paper answer the following
   questions as a knowledge check!

                        An interactive H5P element has been excluded
                        from this version of the text. You can view it online
            here:
            https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
            sportmarketing/?p=106#h5p-18

3. Hill, JS & Vincent, J 2006, 'Globalisation and sports branding:
   The case of Manchester United', International Journal of
   Sports Marketing and Sponsorship, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 61-78.

4. Hill, JS & Vincent, J 2006, 'Globalisation and sports branding:
   The case of Manchester United', International Journal of
   Sports Marketing and Sponsorship, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 66-7.

                                                                Managing a sports brand | 99
  Understanding how to `brand' and market
  a sport organisation

   Sport organisation, like Manchester United, branding process
   refers to the process of developing and promoting a distinctive
   brand identity for a sport organisation. This can include
   creating a name, logo, and visual identity that represents the
   organisation and its values, as well as developing a messaging
   platform and key brand attributes that communicate the
   organisation's mission and personality.

      Brand equity is a term used to describe the value of the
   brand, but is not limited to financial value even though equity
   is a financial term. But brands can also build equity in
   perceptions and attitudes. Strong brands have high levels of
   awareness, clearly defined attributes, and attract favourable
   attitudes5.

      An effective sport organisation brand can help to
   differentiate the organisation from its competitors, create a
   loyal fan base and increase revenue through increased ticket
   sales, merchandise sales and sponsorship. A strong brand can
   also help to build trust and credibility with sport consumers,
   and create a sense of community and belonging among fans.

  What is the BILP model?

   The BLIP model is a framework for developing and managing
   sport organisation brands. It includes four key steps: Building

5. DeGaris, L 2015, Sports marketing: a practical approach,
   Routledge, London.

   100 | Managing a sports brand
   Brands, Leveraging Brands, Identifying and Measuring
   Brands, and Protecting Brands.6

      But a quick summary is as follows noting this was presented
   at the Institute for Research in Marketing's Carlson on
   Branding Conference May 19-20, 2006. [Link to text in
   footnotes]7

    1. Building Brands: This step involves creating a distinctive
         and compelling brand identity for the sport organisation
         that aligns with the expectations and preferences of its
         target consumers. This can include developing a name,
         logo, and visual identity that represents the organisation,
         as well as a messaging platform that communicates the
         organization's mission, values, and personality.

    2. Leveraging Brands: Once the brand has been developed,
         it is important to leverage it to create value for the
         organisation and its stakeholders. This can include using
         the brand to differentiate the organisation from its
         competitors, to increase revenue through increased ticket
         sales, merchandise sales, and sponsorship, and to build

6. Roedder John, D 2006, Strategic 'Brand Management on the
   Cutting Edge: Building, Leveraging, Identifying, and
   Protecting Brands', Institute for Research in Marketing's
   Carlson on Branding Conference, May 19-20, University of
   Minnesota, Summary available at
   <http://assets.csom.umn.edu/assets/75903.pdf>.

7. Adapted from Roedder John, D 2006, Strategic 'Brand
   Management on the Cutting Edge: Building, Leveraging,
   Identifying, and Protecting Brands', Institute for Research in
   Marketing's Carlson on Branding Conference, May 19-20,
   University of Minnesota, Summary available at
   <http://assets.csom.umn.edu/assets/75903.pdf>.

                                                                Managing a sports brand | 101
trust and credibility with sport consumers.

3. Identifying and Measuring Brands: This step involves

identifying and measuring the effectiveness of the brand.

This can include tracking and analysing data on consumer

behaviour, such as ticket sales, merchandise sales, and

social media activity, as well as conducting market

research to gain a deeper understanding of sport

consumers and their preferences.

4. Protecting Brands: This step involves

protecting the organisation's brand

from unauthorised use and

infringement. This can include

registering                    trademarks    and

copyrights, monitoring for potential

infringement, and taking legal action

to protect the organisation's

intellectual property.

In focus: Sydney Swifts Netball Team

   The Sydney Swifts is a women's netball team in
Australia, which means they face specific opportunities
and challenges when building and protecting their
brand. One way to approach brand management for
the Sydney Swifts is by using the BILP model, which
includes four key steps: building the brand, leveraging
the brand, identifying and measuring the brand, and
protecting the brand.

102 | Managing a sports brand
Woman exercising

   When building the brand, the Sydney Swifts can
focus on promoting gender equality, empowering
women in sports, and creating a positive and inclusive
community. This can be achieved by highlighting the
achievements of female athletes, promoting gender
diversity in leadership and coaching positions, and
showcasing the importance of women's sports in the
community.

   To leverage their brand, the Sydney Swifts can
partner with organisations and businesses that support
women's sports and share their values. This can include
collaborating with other women's sports teams or
working with companies that have a strong
commitment to diversity and inclusion.

                                                     Managing a sports brand | 103
           The Sydney Swifts can measure the impact of their
        brand on their target audience by conducting surveys
        and focus groups that specifically focus on the
        experiences of women and girls in the community
        (grassroots!). This can help them better understand how
        their brand is perceived and how it can be improved to
        better support gender equality in sports.

           Finally, the Sydney Swifts need to protect their brand
        from negative comments and feedback that can be
        directed towards women's sports. They can do this by
        actively promoting positive messages about women's
        sports on social media and addressing any negative
        comments or feedback quickly and effectively.

  What is ambush marketing in sport

   Ambush marketing is a tactic used by companies to associate
   themselves with a sports event or team without officially
   sponsoring it8.

      This can include using similar branding, imagery, or slogans
   to those used by official sponsors, or running advertising
   campaigns that make it appear as though the company is
   an official sponsor. An example of ambush marketing in sport
   would be a company that is not an official sponsor of a sports
   event, but still uses tactics to associate themselves with the

8. Scott, OK, Burton, N & Li, B 2022, 'Sponsor and ambush
   marketing during the 2018 Commonwealth Games on Twitter
   and Instagram', International Journal of Sports Marketing and
   Sponsorship, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 612-27.

   104 | Managing a sports brand
    event in order to gain exposure and leverage the event's
    popularity.

       One example, taken from this guardian newspaper article9
    was during the 2010 FIFA World Cup, Budweiser, an official
    sponsor of the tournament, had exclusive rights to sell beer
    in the stadiums. However, Bavaria, a non-sponsor company,
    distributed thousands of orange dresses to female Dutch fans
    who attended the game between Netherlands and Denmark,
    the dresses were similar to the national Dutch team's colours.
    As a result, many fans were ejected from the stadium, and
    Bavaria was accused of ambushing Budweiser's sponsorship.

       The example shows how Bavaria used similar branding and
    messaging to that of the official sponsors (Budweiser) in order
    to create confusion and associate themselves with the event
    without having to pay the high sponsorship fees. This type
    of marketing can be damaging to the official sponsors and
    the sport organisations, as it can dilute the value of official
    sponsorship and mislead consumers.

    BIG THREAT: Ambush marketing video focusing on Amex
    and Visa.10

 9. World Cup 2010: Women arrested over 'ambush marketing'
    freed on bail 2010, The Guardian, 17 June,
     <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/jun/16/fifa-world-
    cup-ambush-marketing>.

10. Marketing91 2021, Ambush marketing - direct and indirect
    ambush. Examples of Amex and Visa (Marketing video 108), 18
    January, online video, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l-
    obXf0qYWU>.

                                                                Managing a sports brand | 105
                        One or more interactive elements has been
                        excluded from this version of the text. You can
            view them online here:
            https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
            sportmarketing/?p=106#oembed-3

   Sports organisations can protect their brand from ambush
   marketing by implementing a number of strategies.

      The industry report into this title "Brands in the Boardroom"
   (2010)11 suggests several legal strategies to counter the threat
   of ambush marketing.

      · One of these is to secure trademark and copyright
         registrations for all marks, logos, and images associated
         with an upcoming event in all active markets. A publicity
         campaign warning against unauthorised use of the marks
         can also act as a deterrent.

      · Another strategy is to impose contractual obligations on
         cities, athletes, in-stadium spectators, and broadcasters to
         limit their commercial association with competitors of
         official sponsors in and around stadia. These restrictions
         are typically set out in contracts and may involve a clash
         between event, team, and individual sponsorship
         contracts.

   In summary, sport organisations can protect their brand from

11. Kaur, B 2010, Brands in the Boardroom: Apprehending an
   ambush - how to defend against ambush marketing, IPM
   Media Group, India, <https://www.remfry.com/wp-content/
   uploads/2018/02/ambush-marketing-2010.pdf>.

    106 | Managing a sports brand
ambush marketing by implementing a combination of
trademark and copyright protection, clear guidelines and
regulations, legal action, monitoring, building strong
relationships with official sponsors and educating the public
about the negative impact of ambush marketing.

Media Attributions

  · Woman exercising © Jonathan Borba

                                                           Managing a sports brand | 107
9. Promotion and
customer service

     Learning Objectives

          · Define promotion in the context of the sports
             industry and identify different types of
             promotional strategies used to engage with fans
             and build brand awareness.

          · Discuss the role of customer service in the
             sports industry and explain the concept of service
             encounters, including the elements that make for
             a successful service encounter.

          · Evaluate different approaches for managing
             and dealing with customers, including best
             practices for handling customer complaints and
             resolving conflicts.

Introduction

In the realm of sport marketing, promotion and customer
service hold great significance. Promotion involves generating
consciousness and curiosity in a sport-related product or
service through various methods such as advertising, public
relations, personal selling, sales promotion, and direct

108 | Promotion and customer service
   marketing, with the ultimate aim of persuading people to
   purchase it. On the other hand, customer service relates to
   the way a product or experience is sold to the fans. It involves
   all the activities and processes involved in ensuring that the
   customers receive the best possible experience with the
   product or service. Remember that the quality of customer
   service can greatly impact the overall success of a sport
   product or service!

                       One or more interactive elements has been
                       excluded from this version of the text. You can
            view them online here:
            https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
            sportmarketing/?p=169#oembed-1

  Promotion

   Promotion is the plan of action which helps to diffuse the
   information to increase the sale capacity. Drawing on
   Brassington & Pettitt textbook "Principals of Marketing" 1,
   Kumar and Patra in an article written in 2017 classify
   "promotion" into five components these are especially:
   Advertising, Sales Promotion, Public Relations, Personal
   Selling, and Direct Marketing 2.

1. Brassington, F & Pettit, S 2000, Principles of Marketing, 2nd
   edn, Pearson Education, Harlow, UK.

2. Kumar, S & Patra, S, 2017, 'Does promotion mix really help to
   enhance brand equity: A literature review', Indian Journal of
   Commerce and Management Studies, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 80-6.

                                                   Promotion and customer service | 109
                    An interactive H5P element has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view it online
        here:
        https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
        sportmarketing/?p=169#h5p-19

There has been considerable talk surrounding the AFLW's
decision to provide free tickets to fans during the 2020 season
as a promotion strategy. As outlined in the article below, the
Australian Football League Women's (AFLW) lack of a ticketing
system has led to some issues. While the AFL had previously
offered free entry to women's games to allow the competition
to establish its supporter base, some say that this approach
may actually hinder the growth of the AFLW. Concerns have
been raised about whether it might be beneficial for the AFLW
to begin offering tickets for certain games, such as the season
opener, to reduce fan anxiety regarding capacity limitations.

     Are free tickets (Sales Promotion) a problem for women's
     sport?

        This 2020 article highlights how giving away free
     tickets can be problematic. Have a read.

110 | Promotion and customer service
           AFLW's free games without tickets are proving to be
        a surprising problem for fans3

                             One or more interactive elements has
                             been excluded from this version of the
                  text. You can view them online here:
                  https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
                  sportmarketing/?p=169#oembed-2

           The AFLW claimed at the time this article was written
        was that ticketing would create a price barrier, which
        could deter potential fans from attending. However,
        this claim seems unfounded as fans regularly express
        their desire to contribute financially to the game, as
        evidenced by their willingness to purchase player
        sponsorships and club memberships. Furthermore, the
        lack of ticketing also provides ammunition for critics of
        the league, who argue that the AFLW lacks support
        because games are free to attend.

           We know that a focus on crowd numbers can be
        misleading and fail to recognise the underlying issues
        faced by women's sport, such as gender equity and
        LGBTIQ inclusivity.

3. O'Halloran, K 2020, 'AFLW's free games without tickets are
   proving to be a suprising problem for fans', ABC News, 10
   February, <https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-02-10/aflw-no-
   tickets-a-problem/11949354>.

                                                     Promotion and customer service | 111
                             Let's discuss this in class!

So we can see that in the sport industry, having a solid
promotion strategy and understanding the target market is
crucial for success. A well-designed promotion strategy can
help sports organisations effectively reach and engage with
their target audience, such as fans, athletes, or other
stakeholders (like sponsors, NGO's or Government). This
strategy can encompass various techniques, such as
advertising, social media marketing, and event promotion.

   However, in order to make these "promotional methods"
work, it is essential you have a clear understanding of the target
market and their motivations (see how the weeks are linking
together!).

   By identifying their interests, preferences, and needs, sports
organisations can tailor their promotion strategies to
effectively connect with their audience and build meaningful
relationships. Ultimately, a strong promotion strategy that is
well-suited to the target market can lead to increased visibility,
engagement, and revenue in the sport industry.

        But remember - a promotion strategy without good
customer service and follow up will likely fall flat on its face.

Sales and selling strategies: Customer
service

As sports management students, it's important to understand
the significance of customer service in the highly competitive
sports industry. When I interviewed past students from our
sports management program last year a lot of them (after
graduation) worked in customer service roles. However, some

112 | Promotion and customer service
   of them expressed that they didn't feel adequately prepared
   for the unique challenges of dealing with customers. So this
   week has been designed to give you some tips and tricks in
   managing customers and hitting the mark when it comes to
   customer service.

   Two people in a customer transaction

   Providing excellent customer service is not only essential in
   building and maintaining a loyal fan base, but it also has the
   potential to increase revenue and brand loyalty. Academics
   have described "service encounters" as "the direct interaction
   between a service operation and its customer/client4.
   In the sports industry, providing quality service encounter is

4. Lewis, BR & Entwistle, TW 1990, 'Managing the service
   encounter: A focus on the employee', International Journal of
   Service Industry Management, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 41-52.
                                                     Promotion and customer service | 113
   crucial for attracting and retaining customers- whatever the
   business is! According to Lewis and Entwistle (1990)5, there
   are several areas of customer service that are essential for
   successful service encounters.

     · Firstly, process, procedural, and technical skills are
         important for ensuring that the services provided meet
         customers' needs and expectations. This includes having
         a thorough understanding of the products and services
         offered, as well as the ability to efficiently and effectively
         carry out tasks related to customer service6.

     · Secondly, interpersonal or "people skills" are vital for
         creating positive and engaging service encounters. This
         involves having the ability to communicate effectively with
         customers, establish rapport and build relationships, and
         provide personalised service to meet individual needs7.

     · Thirdly, behavioural flexibility and adaptability are critical
         for handling a range of customer interactions and
         situations. This includes being able to adjust
         communication and service approaches to suit different
         customers and scenarios, as well as being able to handle
         and resolve customer complaints or issues8.

5. Lewis, BR & Entwistle, TW 1990, 'Managing the service
   encounter: A focus on the employee', International Journal of
   Service Industry Management, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 41-52.

6. Adapted from Lewis, BR & Entwistle, TW 1990, 'Managing the
   service encounter: A focus on the employee', International
   Journal of Service Industry Management, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 41-52.

7. Adapted from Lewis, BR & Entwistle, TW 1990, 'Managing the
   service encounter: A focus on the employee', International
   Journal of Service Industry Management, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 41-52.

8. Adapted from Lewis, BR & Entwistle, TW 1990, 'Managing the
   service encounter: A focus on the employee', International

   114 | Promotion and customer service
     · Lastly, empathy is a key element of customer service in
         the sports industry, as it involves understanding and
         responding to customers' emotions and concerns. This can
         include actively listening to customers, showing
         compassion and understanding, and providing emotional
         support when needed9.

   Now, let's test your understanding of these concepts

                        An interactive H5P element has been excluded
                        from this version of the text. You can view it online
            here:
            https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
            sportmarketing/?p=169#h5p-20

      Applying this insight, have a look at the following example
   which explored how important customer service was to those
   working in the physical health (gym) industry.

         Selling Gym Memberships

   Journal of Service Industry Management, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 41-52.
9. Adapted from Lewis, BR & Entwistle, TW 1990, 'Managing the

   service encounter: A focus on the employee', International
   Journal of Service Industry Management, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 41-52.

                                                     Promotion and customer service | 115
            In recent years, fitness centres have become
         increasingly popular in the sports industry, as people
         have become more focused on health and wellness.
         Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, the global fitness
         industry had experienced steady growth, with millions
         of people worldwide actively using fitness services10.

            Multiple studies have discussed how the fitness
         services (like gyms, workout-classes etc.) rely heavily on
         social interactions, such as interactions between staff
         and customers, and between customers themselves1112.

            In this weeks additional reading titled "Service
         encounter and repurchase intention in fitness centres:
         perceived value as a mediator and service
         innovativeness as a moderator"13 explores these issues

10. Moxham, C & Wiseman, F 2009, 'Examining the development,
    delivery and measurement of service quality in the fitness
    industry: A case study', Total Quality Management, vol. 20, no.
    5, pp. 467-82.

11. Nathan, RJ, Tan, PK & Victor, V 2022, 'Fitness trainers' physical
    attractiveness and gym goers' exercise intention',
    International Journal of Business and Society, vol. 23, no. 1, pp.
    496-517.

12. Amjad, T 2020, 'Contemporary challenges in entrepreneurial
    marketing: development of a new pedagogy model', Journal
    of Entrepreneurship Education, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1-22.

13. Wang, FJ & Chiu, W 2023, 'Service encounter and repurchase
    intention in fitness centers: perceived value as a mediator and
    service innovativeness as a moderator', International Journal
    of Sports Marketing and Sponsorship, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 145-67.

     116 | Promotion and customer service
and gives us some valuable insights into this important
area of customer service.

   In this study, the researchers aimed to investigate the
impact of service encounters on customers'
perceptions and behaviours in fitness centres.
Specifically, they examined the relationship between
service encounters, perceived value, service
innovativeness, and repurchase intention. The study
involved 806 participants who were members of fitness
centres in Taiwan.

   The study found that when customers have good
experiences with fitness centre employees, they are
more likely to think the service is worth the price and
come back again. It also found that when the fitness
centre introduces new and innovative services, this
makes the customers feel like they're getting more
value from their experience with the employees and
the overall fitness company.

                    One or more interactive elements has
                    been excluded from this version of the
        text. You can view them online here:
        https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
        sportmarketing/?p=169#oembed-3

                                           Promotion and customer service | 117
   Dealing with customers

    Customer service is one of the most critical components of
    sport management, as the success of any sports organisation
    is ultimately determined by the satisfaction of its customers.
    This section aims to provide an overview of how to effectively
    deal with customers- including providing you some strategies
    for building rapport with customers, addressing customer
    concerns, and resolving customer complaints.

       Be it known now - we will be doing some role playing in
    class this week, so make sure you watch the video14 and come
    prepared to be both the "cranky customer" and "caring and
    competent staff" across multiple scenarios!

                         One or more interactive elements has been
                         excluded from this version of the text. You can
             view them online here:
             https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
             sportmarketing/?p=169#oembed-4

    One of the best ways to deal with customers who may not
    be in the best mood is tricky. In an article written by SBCC
    Small Business British Columbia titled "10 Tips for Dealing with
    Customers"15 they give us some great tips in approaching

14. Skillsoft YouTube 2019, Handling Customer Complaints:
    Defusing Frustration, 22 August, online video,
    <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WphIXqTp_es>.

15. SBBC, 10 Tips for Dealing with Customers,

     118 | Promotion and customer service
customers when in a customer facing role. I have taken their 10
tips and adapted them for you to the sport industry.

                    An interactive H5P element has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view it online
        here:
        https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
        sportmarketing/?p=169#h5p-21

  Make sure you go over these before class this week as we
     will be practicing these with multiple scenarios in our
                                       workshop.

Media Attributions

  · Two people in a customer transaction © Clay Banks

<https://smallbusinessbc.ca/article/ten-tips-dealing-
customers/>.

                                                 Promotion and customer service | 119
10. Corporate
sponsorship and
memberships

     Learning Objectives

          · Understand corporate sponsorship and identify
             the ethical issues associated with it in the sports
             industry.

          · Explore the different types of corporate
             sponsorship that exist

          · Analyse and assess case studies of corporate
             sponsorships and evaluate their effectiveness in
             achieving the sponsor's goals and the team's
             objectives.

          · Understand the importance of memberships in
             the sports industry and how they can benefit fans
             and sports teams.

Introduction

In the world of sports marketing, corporate sponsorship and
memberships play a crucial role in achieving success.
Corporate sponsorship and memberships are important as

120 | Corporate sponsorship and memberships
they allow organisations to establish connections with fans,
enhance brand visibility, and generate revenue through sales.
In this chapter, we will be discussing the various types of
corporate partnerships, and memberships and the
significance of these for you all studying sports marketing.

                    One or more interactive elements has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You can
        view them online here:
        https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
        sportmarketing/?p=176#oembed-1

Corporate sponsorship

There are different types of sponsorship in sports, such as team
sponsorship, athlete sponsorship, and event sponsorship. Team
sponsorship involves providing financial aid and resources to
a sports team in exchange for brand visibility. This type of
sponsorship is usually observed in professional sports, where
companies display their logo on jerseys, stadium signs, and
other promotional materials.

   The topic of sports sponsorship has become increasingly
complex in recent years. While there used to be a clear
consensus on the unacceptability of certain companies, like
tobacco companies, sponsoring sports teams, the line has
become blurrier. You may have heard about the complex
relationship between sport and sponsors in the media. As
societies value change, this is leading to a change to how sport
teams want to align their brand with non-sports related
business organisations.

   For example, last year Australian energy and resources

                                   Corporate sponsorship and memberships | 121
companies like Woodside Energy and Alinta were facing
criticism for their sports sponsorships. Australian cricket player,
Pat Cummins, decided not to feature in any promotional
material for Alinta Energy during the final year of their
sponsorship deal with Cricket Australia. Cummins is an
advocate for climate action and has previously appeared in TV
adverts for the energy company. He raised objections to Cricket
Australia about the sponsorship deal, but the governing body
says that this had no bearing on the forthcoming end to the
partnership.

                    One or more interactive elements has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You can
        view them online here:
        https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
        sportmarketing/?p=176#oembed-2

          Questions to think about;
           1. How important is it for sports organisations

                to consider their athletes' personal beliefs and
                values when selecting sponsorship partners?
          2. How might a sports organisation balance
                the financial benefits of a sponsorship deal
                with the potential reputational risks posed by a
                controversial sponsor?

122 | Corporate sponsorship and memberships
Also, Netball Australia recently pulled out of a $15 million
sponsorship deal with Hancock Prospecting, a mining
company, after Indigenous player Donnell Wallam who plays
on the national team, objected to wearing a uniform bearing
the company logo, citing the company founder's controversial
views on Indigenous people. Her teammates also joined the
boycott, leading to the cancellation of the sponsorship deal.

   However, not everyone agreed with this position and many
in the media argued that the financial sustainability of Netball
was at risk due to this decision.

                    One or more interactive elements has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You can
        view them online here:
        https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
        sportmarketing/?p=176#oembed-3

          We will discuss this example in class- but have a
       look online to see if you can find some other
       examples of controversy sponsorship deals.

Researchers have also investigated and published research on
sponsorship- for example in a study that explored sponsorships
deals with regional Rugby Union teams in New Zealand
interviewed members from six different rural teams to get their
understanding of this dynamic. They explored their

                                   Corporate sponsorship and memberships | 123
   perspectives on using sponsors that could be seen to promote
   "unhealthy lifestyles"1.

      The article (one of this weeks additional readings) discusses
   the challenges that regional Rugby Union sport organisations
   (RSOs) in NZ face. It highlights the difficulty of balancing the
   benefits and risks of sponsorship deals with fast food and soft
   drink companies. Whilst these companies provide substantial
   funding that RSOs need to maintain and develop their
   programs, they are associated with unhealthy products that
   contradict the health and fitness goals of many sports
   organisations2.

   Group of people playing Rugby Union

1. Batty, RJ & Gee, S 2019, 'Fast food, fizz, and funding: Balancing
   the scales of regional sport organisation sponsorship', Sport
   Management Review, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 167-79.

2. Batty, RJ & Gee, S 2019, 'Fast food, fizz, and funding: Balancing
   the scales of regional sport organisation sponsorship', Sport
   Management Review, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 167-79.
   124 | Corporate sponsorship and memberships
   The authors in their interviews with sponsorship managers and
   CEOs gathered really interesting insights and
   recommendations on the issue. They found that some teams
   implemented policies to reduce the availability of unhealthy
   food and drinks at their events and venues, whilst others found
   alternative funding sources3.

      The article suggests that teams need to balance financial
   sustainability with promoting healthy lifestyles by considering
   the long-term impacts of sponsorships on their values and
   community health. To make informed sponsorship choices, the
   authors recommend that RSOs engage in transparent and
   collaborative decision-making processes with stakeholders4.

  Deloitte Report

   The linked Deloitte report "Sponsoring sports in the digital
   age"5 (your second additional reading for this week) examines
   how sports sponsorship is changing in the digital age and
   provides a use case from the 2019 FIFA Women's World Cup
   to illustrate its key findings. The report highlights that digital
   technology has changed the way fans consume sports content
   and interact with their favourite teams and players. As a result,

3. Batty, RJ & Gee, S 2019, 'Fast food, fizz, and funding: Balancing
   the scales of regional sport organisation sponsorship', Sport
   Management Review, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 167-79.

4. Batty, RJ & Gee, S 2019, 'Fast food, fizz, and funding: Balancing
   the scales of regional sport organisation sponsorship', Sport
   Management Review, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 167-79.

5. Deloitte 2020, Sponsoring sports in the digital age,
   <https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/lu/
   Documents/sports-consulting/lu-sponsoring-sports-today-
   digital-age.pdf>

                                       Corporate sponsorship and memberships | 125
   they suggest in this report that sports sponsorship needs to
   adapt to these changes and focus on engaging fans in new and
   innovative ways.

                        An interactive H5P element has been excluded
                        from this version of the text. You can view it online
            here:
            https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
            sportmarketing/?p=176#h5p-22

  Not all sponsorships are the same

   An article published by Prachar Communications described
   how sports sponsorship is an important aspect for athletes,
   sport teams and events to earn revenue through
   endorsements. They note in this article that there are different
   types of sports sponsorships such as title sponsor, official
   sponsor and technical sponsor. Flip the cards to learn more
   about the different types of sponsorships6.

                        An interactive H5P element has been excluded

6. Prachar Communications 2021, Sport Sponsorship Marketing:
   What are the Different Types? <https://prachar.in/sports-
   sponsorship-marketing-what-are-the-different-types/>
   126 | Corporate sponsorship and memberships
                    from this version of the text. You can view it online
        here:
        https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
        sportmarketing/?p=176#h5p-24

Memberships: The art of selling

Understanding the various types of sports memberships
available is crucial for sports teams to build a successful
membership program that resonates with their target market.
These memberships come in different shapes and sizes, each
offering unique benefits and experiences to fans.

   Typically, membership packages are structured in a tiered
system, which means that each package offers different
benefits and rewards based on the fan's or organisation's
financial contribution to purchase membership tickets. By
comparing different sports teams' membership packages, we
can gain insight into how they are positioning their
memberships to cater to different segments of their fan base.

   So, before our class discussion, it is recommended to have a
look at the Western Sydney Wanderers' and Newcastle Knights
membership packages to understand how they are structured
and the benefits they offer to their members.

   A-League Women - Western Sydney Wanderers FC
A-League Men - Western Sydney Wanderers FC

   NRLW - Newcastle Knights
NRL - Newcastle Knights

                                   Corporate sponsorship and memberships | 127
                    One or more interactive elements has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You can
        view them online here:
        https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
        sportmarketing/?p=176#oembed-4

Benefits of membership for a fan

Becoming a member of a professional sports team offers a
wide range of benefits that extend beyond the simple pleasure
of watching your favourite team or player play. While discounts
on merchandise are definitely perks of membership, the
community and networking opportunities that come with
being a member are often overlooked.

   Being part of a sports team community can offer you the
chance to connect with like-minded individuals who share
your passion for the sport (so a social good!), whilst also giving
you access to unique events and opportunities that are not
available to the general public.

   Often professional sports teams often offer their members
exclusive access to events such as player meet and greets,
behind-the-scenes tours, and even VIP seating at games. These
events not only offer you the opportunity to get up close and
personal with your favourite player/s, but they also provide a
chance to network with other fans who share your enthusiasm
for the sport.

   Networking with fellow members can lead to the
development of new friendships, business partnerships, and
even career opportunities.

128 | Corporate sponsorship and memberships
      Check out this 2020 fan day vlog created by a Parramatta Eels
   fan7.

                       One or more interactive elements has been
                       excluded from this version of the text. You can
            view them online here:
            https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
            sportmarketing/?p=176#oembed-5

   Moreover, sports teams often engage in community outreach
   programs and initiatives that provide their members with
   opportunities to give back to their communities. Members may
   be able to participate in charity events, volunteer programs,
   and community service projects that allow them to make a
   positive impact on the lives of others. Being part of a sports
   team community can give members a sense of pride and
   fulfilment that extends far beyond the sport itself.

      For example, Souths Cares is the official charity arm of the
   South Sydney Rabbitohs NRL team, focused on making a
   positive difference in the community. Fans of the team have
   the opportunity to support Souths Cares by donating to the
   charity or by participating in various fundraising events held
   throughout the year.

      Through their work, Souths Cares aims to empower and
   inspire individuals, particularly in Indigenous communities, to
   make positive changes in their lives and become active

7. ENTERTAIN HOUSE 2020, Parramatta Eels fan day vlog
   2020, 22 February, online video, <https://www.youtube.com/
   watch?v=zpqR5realZQ>.

                                      Corporate sponsorship and memberships | 129
   members of their community. Watch the following video that
   explores their 2022 year in review8.

                        One or more interactive elements has been
                        excluded from this version of the text. You can
            view them online here:
            https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
            sportmarketing/?p=176#oembed-6

   In summary, becoming a member of a professional sports
   team can offer benefits that go far beyond simply watching the
   team play. Membership can provide access to exclusive events
   and networking opportunities, as well as opportunities to give
   back to the community and make a positive impact on the lives
   of others. We will explore this in more detail next week (Week
   11- Community and Stakeholders).

      Let's do a knowledge check of this week content.

                        An interactive H5P element has been excluded
                        from this version of the text. You can view it online
            here:
            https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
            sportmarketing/?p=176#h5p-25

8. South Sydney Rabbitohs 2022, Souths Cares - year in review, 5
   September, online video, <https://www.youtube.com/
   watch?v=_4yYJdLVtKY>.

   130 | Corporate sponsorship and memberships
Media Attributions

  · Group of people playing Rugby Union © Quino Al

                                   Corporate sponsorship and memberships | 131
11. Community and
stakeholders

     Learning Objectives

          · Understand the importance of community and
             stakeholder relationships in sports marketing.

          · Evaluate the impact of corporate social
             responsibility (CSR) in the sports industry.

          · Develop effective community plans and
             strategies for sports organisations.

          · Develop and implement effective stakeholder
             engagement plans and programs

          · Evaluate the success of community and
             stakeholder engagement strategies in the sports
             industry

Introduction

Sports organisations play an essential role in their
communities, and their influence can have a significant impact
on society. By supporting various initiatives that promote
health and fitness, education, diversity, and inclusion, sports
organisations can make a positive difference. Through their
involvement in community initiatives, sports organisations can

132 | Community and stakeholders
strengthen their relationships with all different kinds of
stakeholders, including fans, sponsors, athletes, employees,
and governing bodies.

                    One or more interactive elements has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You can
        view them online here:
        https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
        sportmarketing/?p=178#oembed-1

Building strong relationships with the
community: CSR

Building stronger relationships through community
involvement can enhance a sports organisation's reputation
and contribute to its success. By aligning their community
involvement with their brand values and objectives, sports
organisations can create a positive impact on society while
enhancing their brand image. Sport fans increasingly seek to
support socially responsible and sustainable organisations, and
sports organisations that engage in community initiatives can
differentiate themselves from their competitors.

   One way sport teams do this is by adopting to the principals
of CSR. CSR stands for "Corporate Social Responsibility". In its
basic term it is a business model that involves companies
taking responsibility for their impact on society, both
economically and socially.

   Companies are expected to act in the best interest of their

                                                     Community and stakeholders | 133
   community and their stakeholders- including customers,
   employees, shareholders, and the wider community1.

      Research has found that Corporate Social Responsibility
   (CSR) has a positive impact on marketing performance, and
   it is made up of different dimensions that relate differently to
   various stakeholders. One way to create a CSR perception of a
   brand is through sponsoring charities and professional sports
   teams2.

      Sports provide stakeholders/business organisations to
   establish a socially responsible image due to sports unique
   position in society and the emotional attachment to sport
   teams people have. Sponsorship therefore creates a halo effect
   where consumers' goodwill towards a sports team rubs off on
   a sponsoring brand.

      Therefore, through sponsorship of consumer-favoured sport
   teams, other business brands can generate a socially
   responsible image in the eyes of consumers3.

      The video below are comments made by members of various
   football organisations talking about why CSR is important as
   a tool to also give back to the community (we can't be too
   negative to the intentions of brands here!)4

1. Demirel, A 2020, 'CSR in sport sponsorship consumers'
   perceptions of a sponsoring brand's CSR', International
   Journal of Sports Marketing and Sponsorship, vol. 21, no. 2, pp.
   371-88.

2. Bradish, C & Cronin, JJ 2009, 'Corporate social responsibility in
   sport', Journal of Sport Management, vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 691-7.

3. Demirel, A 2020, 'CSR in sport sponsorship consumers'
   perceptions of a sponsoring brand's CSR', International
   Journal of Sports Marketing and Sponsorship, vol. 21, no. 2, pp.
   371-88.

4. EFDN Foundation 2019, Why do you think football clubs

   134 | Community and stakeholders
                    One or more interactive elements has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You can
        view them online here:
        https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
        sportmarketing/?p=178#oembed-2

Let's have a look at how the premiers of the NRL are making an
impact on their community.

     Penrith Panthers: Panthers on the prowl

        Penrith Panthers, as part of their CSR, have a
     community program called "Panthers on the Prowl",
     which supports children through access to programs
     and resources promoting healthy lifestyles and
     initiatives targeting at-risk students. The Panthers have
     developed a close relationship with over 250 schools in
     Western Sydney, and the Penrith Junior Rugby League
     is the largest Rugby League nursery in the country.

        The Panthers also provide partnership opportunities
     for businesses to (co)deliver Corporate Social

should organise CSR activities, 13 December, online video,
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4D828fjbQo0>.

                                                     Community and stakeholders | 135
        Responsibility obligations and engage with the
        community.

           The teams community programs are designed
        around a 4 pillar framework: Education, Social
        Inclusion, Engagement, and Healthy.

           Have a look at the Panthers website and watch the
        below video to find more about the specific programs
        they have created to give back to their community5.

                             One or more interactive elements has
                             been excluded from this version of the
                  text. You can view them online here:
                  https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
                  sportmarketing/?p=178#oembed-3

   It is important to remember that to create successful
   community programs, it's essential for a sport team to have
   a deep understanding of the community they represent. This
   includes knowledge of the community's demographics, the
   challenges and issues faced by different groups within the
   community, and the community's needs and aspirations.

5. panthersontheprowl1 2019, Panthers on the Prowl, 14 February,
   online video, <https://www.youtube.com/
   watch?v=ebCVclroiWE>.

   136 | Community and stakeholders
   By having this understanding, sport teams can create
programs that are tailored to the specific needs of the
community, ensuring they are effective and well-received.
Additionally, by engaging with the community and getting
feedback on their programs, sport teams can continually
improve and adapt their initiatives to better meet the
community's needs.

Creating a (good) community plan

To create an effective community plan, sports organisations
should identify the needs and interests of their communities
and align them with their brand values and objectives. For
example, they can partner with local organisations and non-
profits to support initiatives that align with their values and
objectives.

   By communicating their community involvement initiatives
effectively, sports organisations can showcase their positive
impact on society and enhance their reputation. Ultimately,
community involvement can benefit both the sports
organisation and the broader society it serves.

          It is important to remember that when
       implementing a community strategy, clubs need to
       to clearly outline their goals, the type of program
       they will deliver, the external partners they will
       engage to help deliver the program, the target
       group for the program, and the desired outcomes of
       the community strategy.

                                                     Community and stakeholders | 137
          Clear goals help clubs to identify the specific
       outcomes they want to achieve through their
       community programs. A well-defined program
       design ensures that clubs deliver activities that align
       with their goals, and that are appropriate for their
       target audience.

          Engaging external partners helps to expand a
       club's reach and resources, and to ensure that their
       programs are more effective and relevant to the
       community they are serving.

          Identifying the target group for the program helps
       clubs to ensure that their programs are tailored to
       meet the specific needs of their community - with a
       very specific focus (this could be related to targeting
       individuals from particular age, gender or cultural
       background

          Finally, outlining desired outcomes ensures that
       clubs can measure the impact of their programs, and
       determine whether they have achieved their goals.

          Let's look at an example on the Bulldogs website
       that related to the "multicultural" pillar of their
       strategy and how they have implemented a program
       in their local community.

For example, the Canterbury-Bankstown Bulldogs engaged
with their local community to develop their community
strategy that was collaborative and unique to their local area.
Throughout this process, the Bulldogs and their local
community, identified the following `community pillars' that
they believe will highlight and address local social needs. These
are: Multicultural, Arts and Culture, Participation.

138 | Community and stakeholders
A photo of different hands celebrating multiculturalism

     Bulldogs Community Strategy: Multiculturalism Pillar

        Goal: Leverage the power of sport to create a
     harmonious community by actively engaging and
     celebrating our proud diverse community.

        Program: Motivating classroom students to be active
     in the community.

        External Partners: Canterbury League Club,

                                                     Community and stakeholders | 139
     Community Minds Inc, Western Sydney University and
     City of Canterbury Bankstown

        Target Group: Primary school children aged 9-11,
     Canterbury-Bankstown area

        Outcomes: Increase community and civic
     participation among children, Improved and increased
     community connectedness of students, Increase
     engagement between Bulldogs and school children,
     Increase participation in junior rugby league, Increased
     sense of pride in community, Shifting mindsets from
     deficit thinking to positive asset-based thinking

                 (please note this is adapted from their website)

   As we can see, community involvement can have a broader
impact on society, beyond the immediate benefits to the
sports organisation. By supporting health and fitness
initiatives, sports organisations can promote physical and
mental well-being in their communities.

   By supporting education initiatives particularly, they can
provide opportunities for learning and skill-building in new and
exciting way. By supporting diversity and inclusion initiatives,
they can promote a more equitable and just society.

140 | Community and stakeholders
  Evaluation of community programs

   This week I am asking you to read through the "Her Sport Her
   Way Grant Program Evaluation report" 6

                        One or more interactive elements has been
                        excluded from this version of the text. You can
            view them online here:
            https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
            sportmarketing/?p=178#oembed-4

   As the video7 above shows, the Her Sport Her Way Grants was
   a grant program initiated by the New South Wales (NSW)
   government in Australia to support initiatives aimed at
   increasing the participation of women and girls in sports.

      The program was part of the NSW Government's women in
   sport strategy, which aimed to create gender-inclusive sports
   environments. The grants were awarded to state sporting
   organisations (SSOs) and state sporting organisations for
   people with disabilities (SSODs), to develop and deliver
   initiatives towards this goal.

6. SPRINTER 2021, Her Sport Her Way Grant Program Evaluation
   Report (2020-2021), <https://www.sport.nsw.gov.au/sites/
   default/files/2021-12/
   HSHW%20Grant%20Program%20Evaluation%20Round1_FINA
   L%20REPORT_Website.pdf>.

7. Office of Sport 2019, Her Sport Her Way Grants announced, 6
   December, online video, <https://www.youtube.com/
   watch?v=QS9nsS1iUsc>.

                                                         Community and stakeholders | 141
   The program was evaluated to monitor changes in the
funded organisations' towards making the sports sector more
gender-inclusive

   You need to understand that evaluation procedures are
crucial in ensuring that community initiatives are effective and
impactful. Without proper evaluation, it is difficult to determine
whether the programs are achieving their intended goals and
making a positive difference in the lives of the target audience.

          When I spoke to industry partners about creating
       this unit, this was an area in which they ALL feel
       graduates need to have more experience.

What we know is that empirical research is also essential in
providing evidence of the impact of community initiatives.
This evidence can be used to attract additional funding and
support from stakeholders, including government agencies,
philanthropic organisations, and private sector companies.

   By demonstrating the positive outcomes of the programs,
sports organisations can increase their credibility and expand
their reach to benefit more individuals and communities.

   In addition to attracting funding, empirical research can also
inform the design and implementation of future community
initiatives. By analysing the results of previous programs,
sports organisations can identify areas for improvement and
adjust their strategies accordingly. This can lead to more
effective and sustainable community initiatives that have a
greater impact on the target audience.

142 | Community and stakeholders
                   Women running on track field.

   The Her Sport Her Way Grant Program was designed to make
   sports environments more gender-inclusive. The program was
   evaluated using a survey administered by the Office of Sport
   and SPRINTER. The survey the designed collected information
   from those who took part that included: membership data by
   gender, and policies/strategies in place8.

8. SPRINTER 2021, Her Sport Her Way Grant Program Evaluation
                                                        Community and stakeholders | 143
   The survey was administered twice, once before program
delivery and 12 months later, to allow for a pre-post
comparison. Only organisations that completed the survey at
both time points were included in the report for comparison to
previous year's data.

   The evaluation of the program in this report shows why
evaluating community programs is so important. The program
was designed to create gender-inclusive sports environments,
and the evaluation showed that it achieved its long-term
objectives, despite the challenges posed by the COVID-19
pandemic.

   The report tells us that grant funding provided organisations
with necessary resources to experiment with and deliver new
initiatives towards increasing participation of women and girls
in sports, both on and off the field. By evaluating the
completed initiatives, the evaluation did however identify
certain strengths and challenges faced during grant delivery.

   So, watch the video and make some notes on this report
and bring them to class to discuss this week! In the meantime,
have a go at finding at this crossword drawn from this weeks
content as your knowledge check!

       An interactive H5P element has been excluded
       from this version of the text. You can view it online

here:

Report (2020-2021), <https://www.sport.nsw.gov.au/sites/
default/files/2021-12/
HSHW%20Grant%20Program%20Evaluation%20Round1_FINA
L%20REPORT_Website.pdf>.

144 | Community and stakeholders
        https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
        sportmarketing/?p=178#h5p-27

Media Attributions

  · A photo of different hands celebrating multiculturalism ©
      Clay Banks

  · Women running on track field © Jonathan Chng

                                                     Community and stakeholders | 145
12. Introducing the
"Sports Marketing Mix"

     Learning Objectives

          · Identify and evaluate the role of product in
             sports marketing, including product
             development, branding, and packaging
             strategies.

          · Examine the significance of pricing in sports
             marketing, including the various pricing
             strategies used in the industry.

          · Understand the importance of promotion in
             sports marketing, including the use of traditional
             and digital media, sponsorships, and
             endorsements.

          · Analyse the importance of place in sports
             marketing, including the physical and online
             location of products and services.

Introduction

Congratulations!
   We've made it to the final week of content for this unit. This

week is where we bring everything together and provide you

146 | Introducing the "Sports Marketing Mix"
with a comprehensive approach to executing your sports
marketing plan. By the end of this week, you will have a solid
understanding of the marketing mix and how it can be applied
to the sports industry. So, let's get ready to wrap up this unit on
a high note and equip ourselves with the necessary knowledge
to excel in our sport marketing proposal.

                    One or more interactive elements has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You can
        view them online here:
        https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
        sportmarketing/?p=204#oembed-1

I know that introducing a typology at the end of a semester
might seem out of place, but trust me, it's worth it. To truly
grasp the concept of the sports marketing mix, it's crucial to
have a comprehensive understanding of each element
individually. By looking back at all the weeks and reflecting on
what we've learned, we can now connect the dots and see how
each element works together to form a cohesive strategy.

   It's important to note that while the marketing mix has
become a go-to framework in the sports industry for
developing and implementing marketing strategies, it's not a
one-size-fits-all solution. Other marketing experts and scholars

                                      Introducing the "Sports Marketing Mix" | 147
   have also contributed to its evolution and refinement over
   time, bringing new perspectives and insights to the field123.

      To keep things simple (you're welcome!) we are using the
   framework as outlined by Schwarz and Hunter (2017), drawn
   from their textbook "Advanced Theory and Practice in the
   Sports Industry4

      So, let's dive into this concept and see how we can use it to
   excel in the dynamic world of sports marketing!

  The 4 P's (applied to sports marketing)

              Disclaimer: For those of you who have studied
           marketing units before, you may be familiar with the
           traditional 4 P's of the marketing mix. However,
           when applied to the context of sports marketing, the
           framework takes on new meaning and significance.
           It requires a unique and tailored approach that

1. Matic, RM, Maksimovic, N, Vukovic, J, Corilic, D, Bujkovic, R &
   Jaksic, D 2019, 'Marketing mix in team sports in Serbia', Journal
   of Anthropology of Sport and Physical Education, vol. 3, no. 3,
   pp. 3-10.

2. Fetchko, MJ, Roy, DP & Clow, KE 2018, Sports marketing,
   Routledge, London.

3. Reihani, E & Khatibzadeh, M 2021, 'Marketing mix in sport
   tourism context', Journal of New Studies in Sport
   Management, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 247-55.

4. Schwarz, EC & Hunter, JD 2017, Advanced theory and practice
   in sport marketing, Routledge, London.

   148 | Introducing the "Sports Marketing Mix"
           considers the specific characteristics of the sports
           industry and the behaviour of sports consumers.

  Product

   This refers to the sports product or service being offered to
   consumers. This includes various sports-related items such as
   teams, athletes, events, merchandise, and other sports-related
   services. Seems simple enough but when we delve into this
   aspect of the sports marketing mix what is revealed is that the
   notion of a "sports product" is very complex.

      Armstrong and his colleagues are prominent marketing
   academics who argue in their textbook "Principles of
   Marketing" that "product" encompasses multiple dimensions5.
   By incorporating the concepts of core product, actual product,
   and augmented product, we can gain a better understanding
   of product within the context of sports marketing mix.

      The core product is the fundamental benefit or experience
   that the customer is seeking when they purchase a product or
   service. This could be the thrill of watching a live game or the
   sense of accomplishment and camaraderie that comes from
   participating in a sporting event. This is the primary reason why
   fans/customers are interested in the product or service and is
   what sets it apart from other options in the marketplace6

5. Armstrong, G, Adam, S, Denize, S & Kotler, P 2014, Principles of
   marketing, 6th Australian edn, Pearson Australia, Melbourne,
   Vic.

6. Armstrong, G, Adam, S, Denize, S & Kotler, P 2014, Principles of

                                          Introducing the "Sports Marketing Mix" | 149
      The actual product, on the other hand, is the tangible item or
   service that the customer receives as a result of their purchase.
   This could include physical products such as game tickets,
   team merchandise, or sports equipment, or services such as
   sports coaching, training programs, or access to fitness
   facilities. These are the tangible things that customers receive
   and can physically use or interact with7.

      Finally, the augmented product includes any additional
   features or services that go beyond the core and actual
   products and provide added value to the fans/customers. This
   could include VIP seating, access to pre-game activities or
   post-game events, exclusive merchandise or experiences, or
   personalised coaching or training programs. These are the
   extras that make the product or service more desirable and
   valuable to customers and can help differentiate it from
   competitors in the marketplace8

                        An interactive H5P element has been excluded
                        from this version of the text. You can view it online
            here:
            https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
            sportmarketing/?p=204#h5p-29

   marketing, 6th Australian edn, Pearson Australia, Melbourne,
   Vic., p. 206.
7. Armstrong, G, Adam, S, Denize, S & Kotler, P 2014, Principles of
   marketing, 6th Australian edn, Pearson Australia, Melbourne,
   Vic., p. 206.
8. Armstrong, G, Adam, S, Denize, S & Kotler, P 2014, Principles of
   marketing, 6th Australian edn, Pearson Australia, Melbourne,
   Vic., p. 206.

   150 | Introducing the "Sports Marketing Mix"
  Price

   This refers to the monetary value placed on sports products
   or services. Factors such as the cost of production, the level of
   competition, and the perceived value of the product or service
   can influence pricing decisions.

      As we have previously explored, price is the way in which
   customers assess the value of a product or service, and it
   strongly influences their decision-making when choosing
   between competing brand. In fact, effective pricing can be
   a powerful tool for business success. While many people see
   pricing as something beyond their control, it can actually be
   managed effectively - and needs to be in the context of sport!

      The revenue of a sports organisation is heavily influenced by
   pricing decisions. However, traditional approaches to pricing
   may not be suitable for all sport teams (which vary across
   codes). Due to the unique characteristics of fans/customer
   perceptions, sports organisations must carefully consider
   pricing decisions to ensure they reflect the true value of their
   offerings9.

9. Drayer, J & Rascher, DA 2013, 'Sport pricing research: Past,
   present, and future', Sport Marketing Quarterly, vol. 22, no. 3,
   pp. 123-8.

                                           Introducing the "Sports Marketing Mix" | 151
     Person holding sport game tickets

    Sports franchises have a long history of utilising price
    discrimination techniques to their advantage. One such
    strategy is offering bundled tickets, volume discounts, fully
    loaded tickets, giveaway days, and two-part tariffs to
    customers.

       Furthermore, modern sports stadiums tend to offer more
    diverse pricing options and a wider range of seating sections
    to cater to varying price points. For instance, if we compare
    the pricing and seating arrangements of corporate venues at
    Commbank Stadium to that of a suburban sports ground (like
    Belmore Oval or Kogarah Stadium), we can observe significant
    differences in their tiered ticketing structures10.

10. Drayer, J & Rascher, DA 2013, 'Sport pricing research: Past,
    present, and future', Sport Marketing Quarterly, vol. 22, no. 3,
    pp. 123-8.

     152 | Introducing the "Sports Marketing Mix"
      Interestingly, teams with a higher level of uncertainty in their
   demand, as indicated by a greater standard deviation in their
   past winning records, typically provide more pricing options,
   which can ultimately increase their profitability.

      However, setting pricing strategies for a new club can be a
   complex thing to do- have a read of the following article on the
   ROAR titled: The A-Leagues great membership price divide11 to
   compare the cost of memberships for different teams within
   the same league.

              Something to think about when reading this
           article is do you think that sports teams should be
           able to set their own ticket prices or should there
           be a one price fits all for general admission?

              Allowing sports teams to set their own ticket prices
           provides them with the flexibility to adjust prices
           based on market demand and other factors. This can
           help teams maximise revenue and ensure that they
           are able to cover their costs. On the other hand, a
           one-price-fits-all approach for general admission
           may be more equitable and ensure that everyone
           has equal access to sporting events, regardless of
           their ability to pay.

   Lovelock et al. (2009) framework for pricing objectives in
   service organisations provides a useful approach for sports

11. The Roar 2022, The A-Leagues great membership price divide,
   6 September, <https://www.theroar.com.au/2022/09/07/the-a-
   leagues-great-membership-price-divide/>.

                                           Introducing the "Sports Marketing Mix" | 153
    marketing professionals to consider when developing pricing
    strategies12.

                         An interactive H5P element has been excluded
                         from this version of the text. You can view it online
             here:
             https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
             sportmarketing/?p=204#h5p-30

    To test your understanding of the pricing objectives framework
    proposed by Lovelock et al. (2009) you can apply this approach
    to various examples within the context of sports. By doing so,
    you can gain a deeper understanding of how each pricing
    objective can be utilised in real-life situations and how they
    can impact revenue generation, customer loyalty, and capacity
    utilisation - have a go below.

                         An interactive H5P element has been excluded
                         from this version of the text. You can view it online
             here:
             https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
             sportmarketing/?p=204#h5p-31

12. Lovelock, C, Wirtz, J & Chatterjee, J 2009, Services marketing,
    5th edn, Pearson Education, New Delhi, pp. 143-4.
    154 | Introducing the "Sports Marketing Mix"
Promotion

This involves the various tactics used to promote and advertise
sports products or services. We have covered this topic quite
extensively in this textbook, but here is a bit of a recap.

   Throughout this Pressbook we have explored how promotion
plays a critical role in sports marketing, as it helps to raise
awareness, spark interest, and generate excitement for a
particular sports event, team, or product.

Promotion signs
We have explored various examples of successful promotion

                                       Introducing the "Sports Marketing Mix" | 155
    strategies and understood how they are essential for sports
    marketers to reach their intended audience and achieve their
    marketing goals. We unpacked how marketers use a variety
    of methods such as advertising, public relations, social media
    marketing, sponsorship, direct marketing, experiential
    marketing, and content marketing.

       Basically, effective promotion in sports marketing
    necessitates an in-depth understanding of the target
    audience, and the capacity to create compelling messages and
    experiences that resonate with them. A well-rounded
    promotion strategy that utilises multiple channels
    (omnichanel marketing) to reach fans and customers is also
    essential.

  Place

    This refers to the channels through which sports products or
    services are made available to consumers. This includes
    physical locations such as sports stadiums, retail stores, and
    online environments.

       I found an interesting article called "Increasing the Focus
    on `Place' in the Marketing Mix for Facility Dependent Sport
    Services" by Hans Westerbeek and David Shilbury, which was
    published in 1999 which aims to draw attention to the
    importance of the "place" element in the marketing mix of
    facility-dependent sports services13.

       The authors argue that while most sports organisations
    prioritise product, price, and promotion when developing their
    marketing strategies, place is often overlooked. They suggest

13. Westerbeek, HM & Shilbury, D 1999, 'Increasing the focus on
    "place" in the marketing mix for facility dependent sport
    services', Sport Management Review, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1-23.

    156 | Introducing the "Sports Marketing Mix"
    that place is a crucial factor in the success of sports
    organisations, as it can significantly affect consumer behaviour
    and their overall experience.

     Stadium grass

    But why?
       The article talks about how sports organisations can create

    an effective marketing strategy by focusing on "place," which
    refers to the location where sports services are provided. The
    authors provide a framework that includes four essential
    elements: location, accessibility, atmosphere, and design14.

       They explain that a sports facility's location can significantly
    impact its success and that accessibility is also important in

14. Westerbeek, HM & Shilbury, D 1999, 'Increasing the focus on
    "place" in the marketing mix for facility dependent sport
    services', Sport Management Review, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1-23.
                                            Introducing the "Sports Marketing Mix" | 157
    attracting customers from a wide geographic area. The authors
    suggest that creating a positive atmosphere through factors
    like music and lighting can enhance the customer experience
    and encourage repeat business.

       They also assert that design is an essential aspect of place
    marketing and can help differentiate a facility from
    competitors and make it more appealing to customers15.

       What I like most about this reading is that the authors also
    note that place is not only important in the offline world, but
    also in the online world. They argue that the concept of place
    extends beyond the physical location of a facility and includes
    its virtual presence, such as its website and social media pages.
    In the online world (just like in the outside world) a sports
    organisation's virtual presence serves as its place, and its
    design, accessibility, and atmosphere play a crucial role in
    attracting and retaining customers16.

   Putting them all together

    Marketing is an essential aspect of sports organisations in
    Australia, with the industry constantly evolving and becoming
    more competitive. The 4 Ps of marketing - product, price,
    promotion, and place - provide a framework for sports
    marketers to develop effective strategies to attract and retain
    customers. In the Australian context, sports organisations need

15. Westerbeek, HM & Shilbury, D 1999, 'Increasing the focus on
    "place" in the marketing mix for facility dependent sport
    services', Sport Management Review, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1-23.

16. Westerbeek, HM & Shilbury, D 1999, 'Increasing the focus on
    "place" in the marketing mix for facility dependent sport
    services', Sport Management Review, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1-23.

    158 | Introducing the "Sports Marketing Mix"
    to be creative in their marketing efforts to stand out from the
    crowd, particularly with the country's love for sports.

       Watch this video which further summarises all four and puts
    them together for a more holistic understanding of the sports
    marketing mix17

                         One or more interactive elements has been
                         excluded from this version of the text. You can
             view them online here:
             https://westernsydney.pressbooks.pub/
             sportmarketing/?p=204#oembed-2

                         That's all folks ...

               As the author of this Pressbook I would like to
            express my appreciation for your hard work and
            commitment this semester. I hope you found my
            book to be a valuable resource in guiding your
            understanding and discussions of the key concepts
            and practices in the field.

17. Burner, J 2020, Sports Marketing Unit 1: Module 1.2 Marketing
    Mix, online video, <https://www.youtube.com/
    watch?v=IMih38-9yEM>.
                                           Introducing the "Sports Marketing Mix" | 159
          It is always my goal to provide students with a
       comprehensive and engaging guide to the subject
       matter, and I hope that my book has contributed to
       your overall learning experience.

          I hope that the knowledge and skills you have
       gained from this unit will be useful in your future
       studies or career endeavours.

          Sport Marketing really is an exciting and dynamic
       field that requires continuous learning, and I
       encourage you to keep exploring and expanding
       your knowledge.

Media Attributions

  · Person holding sport game tickets © Andy Li
  · Promotion signs © JJ Ying
  · Stadium grass © Blocks Fletcher

160 | Introducing the "Sports Marketing Mix"
Appendix

This is where you can add appendices or other back matter.

                                                                                    Appendix | 161
